Charles Bargue’s _Drawing Course_
2011

ISBN-13: 978-2867702037







_THIS TEXT IS BASED ON THE FREELY AVAILABLE PDF AT
HTTPS://ARCHIVE.ORG/DETAILS/C.BARGUEDRAWINGCOURSE AND THE TEXT AT
HTTP://WWW.INGETANG.COM/PRAXIS/BARGUE/. PLEASE NOTE THAT BOTH VERSIONS’
TEXTS ARE INCOMPLETE, SO IT IS NOT THE COMPLETE TEXT OF THE
CORRESPONDING BOOK BUT IS ALL THAT COULD BE TRANSCRIBED FROM THESE
RESOURCES. IT WAS OBTAINED VIA OCR (TESSERACT) THEN CORRECTED, AND THE
PICTURES WERE EXTRACTED AND TRIMMED WITH IMAGEMAGICK. MAIL ME AT
MAIL@SYLSAU.COM OR HIT ME ON GITHUB AT
HTTPS://GITHUB.COM/RESPONSYSS/BARGUE_DRAWING_COURSE_TEXT IF YOU FIND ANY
ERROR. THANK YOU !_

[Drawing 7]



PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


This book is dedicated to Daniel Graves for several good reasons, the
most important being that he was the instigator, facilitator, and mentor
for the book. From the beginnings of our friendship—some thirty years
old—we talked about republishing the Bargue-Gérôme Drawing Course. The
only complete set known to us at the time was in the National Art
Library, Victoria and Albert Museum, London. Eventually both Mark
Walker, the late and lamented scholar of Bouguereau, and Daniel
separately photographed the plates of the Drawing Course, and prints
from their negatives were soon circulating among a small group of
artists. I enumerated to Daniel the difficulties in doing a new edition:
the course had no text, and although it was self-evident that these were
beautiful drawings—inspiring and exemplary models that any figurative
artist would prize and want to copy—I as an art historian and not a
trained artist found it hard to imagine my writing an explanation of the
plates and their use.
After Daniel and Charles Cecil had opened their atelier in Florence,
Daniel was able to make me the following offer: “Come to Florence and
study in our atelier. I can’t make an artist out of you, but I can teach
you how to draw, and I can help you write the commentary for the
plates.” My first semester at the school was in 1983. Right off the bat
I was given a plumb line, an easel, a cast of a foot in a shadow box,
and was shown the rudiments of the sight-size technique. I was soon
confronted by a model, whom I approached with my plumb line and chalk
and the bit of experience I had gained in drawing the foot. Both Daniel
and Charles—to whom I owe infinite thanks—treated me seriously as a
“prospective artist.” Both of them enjoyed the fact that I had had no
previous training and consequently had little to unlearn. Each day they
looked at my work, discussed it with me, criticized it, encouraged me,
and pushed me along to the next step. It was a type of personal
instruction I had never experienced and, sad to say, had never practiced
in my teaching career. I was in a room with a dozen other students, and
they, too, helped me with technical matters of the most elementary
sort—for instance, how to sharpen my chalk, or how to place my easel.
The moments of silence and discussion among the students were equally
inspiring. By all accounts a hardened art historian and theoretician, I
was suddenly being initiated into how artists worked, thought, and saw.
Following my initiation period, Daniel and Charles spent several
evenings going over the plates of the Drawing Course with me. I made
notations on one of the first portable computers. The notes I took then
became the foundation of the commentaries in this book. So, Dan, here is
your book. Charles, I hope you find it useful, too. You may both find it
difficult to recognize your own words through the multitudinous
revisions of the text, but it is their spirit and your teachings about
how to look at the drawings that animate most of the text.

‘The writing of several books already under way prevented my immediate
return to Florence and my resumption of the study of drawing.
Nonetheless, I continued to draw in studio classes in the schools where
I taught in the United States, and I also drew —most informally—with
several groups of professional artists in Los Angeles, who patiently
accepted my amateur standing while I learned more about their working
habits. My gratitude here to sculptors John Frame and Judy Debrowsky,
whose studios served as the sites for these weekly meetings.

In 1996 I went back to Florence, and for five years thereafter I spent a
winter or spring semester at the Florence Academy. I gave several
lectures—usually on great academic masters—and continued as a student,
drawing _académies_ in the mornings and working from casts or copying
Bargue drawings in the afternoon. At the academy I was aided by many
splendid artists who daily, in turn, criticized my work—Charles Weed,
Maureen Hyde, Simona Dolci, Kevin Gorges, Angelo Ramirez Sanchez, Andrea
Smith, among others—all of whom were patient, aware of my intentions and
abilities, as well as my limitations. The ideas, methods, and sometimes
even the very words of these teachers have worked their way into this
book. I borrowed shamelessly: from Kevin Gorges’s discussions about what
one learned from copying master drawings; from Charles Weed’s critiques
about the underlying reasons for using certain techniques; from the
precise and thoughtful instructions of Simona Dolci and Maureen Hyde
about the necessity of self-criticism and “getting it right.” Among my
student companions, a special acknowledgment must be given to Polly Liu,
who always knew how to help out in a pinch.

These ideas, comments, and suggestions were all augmented and revised by
me to give the text a consistency of voice and method. Here I was helped
by my assistant, Graydon Parrish, an artist of great learning and
intelligence, who regularly gave up months of his valuable studio time
to sit beside me and go over every paragraph of the book. He contributed
whole passages to the technical sections as well as drawing
illustrations for the appendix; he constantly checked or questioned my
vocabulary and helped to consolidate my various notes for the plates. We
worked very closely, and he criticized and helped with all parts of the
book. We often disagreed but, needless to say, our friendship has
survived intact.

Many artists among my friends were interested in the project; a small
number—Jon Swihart, Kevin Gorges, Peter Bougie, Tom Knechtel, and Wes
Christensen—read the manuscript in its penultimate stage and offered
intelligent criticism. Many other artists, eager to see the Drawing
Course published and to give it to their students, have encouraged me
through the years. I thank them all. My friends in
Minneapolis—especially Annette Lesueur and Peter Bougie—sustained and
encouraged me during the long travail,

I was also aided by my academic colleagues, dealers, and collectors. My
colleague Frances Pohl carefully read through the final draft. The most
wonderful example of how art historians work together is exemplified in
the section of this book on Bargue’s death: documents of great
importance were discovered and forwarded to me by Madeleine Beaufort and
Judith Schubb in Paris and by Eric Zafran and DeCourcy E. McIntosh in
the United States. In Cincinnati John Wilson did detective work into the
history of the Cincinnati At Museum for me. The London and New York
staffs of the auction houses Christie’s and Sotheby’s were generous with
their time and always responsive in locating information and
illustrations for the book. The administration and staff of the Goupil
Museum in Bordeaux—in particular Hélène Lafont-Couturier and Pierrre-Lin
Renié—were of crucial importance in terms of the physical production of
the book. They supplied illustrations and information I requested at a
pestiferous rate and arranged for the photographing of the plates of the
Drawing Course from the two complete sets owned by the museum. Sylvie
Aubenas and her staff at the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris found
photographs of lost paintings by Bargue in obscure locations within the
library. The staffs at the Huntington Library in San Marino and the
Getty Research Center in Los Angeles, California, were especially
helpful; in particular, I want to thank Linda Zechler at the first
institution and Mark Henderson at the second. To the countless other
librarians, registrars, curators, and collectors who in one way or
another added to the information, richness, and accuracy of this book I
extend my thanks and gratitude for your cheerful assistance. Curators at
museums in England and the United States have done valiant work for me.
The staff of the Dahesh Museum of Art—associate director Michael
Fahlund, curator Stephen Edidin, associate curator Roger Diederen, and
curatorial research assistant. Frank Verpoorten—has provided unflagging
assistance and advice both as colleagues and good friends. Last but not
least, Monsieur and Madame Ahmed Rafif, my publishers, have given me the
wonderful support and leeway that I have enjoyed for twenty years. It
was Monsieur Rafif’s genial and generous idea 10 add the catalogue of
Bargue’s paintings to this edition of the Drawing Course. Above all,
thanks to my partner, Leonard Simon, for his patience throughout the
writing and production of another book.



INTRODUCTION


The history of the _Drawing Course_

The Bargue-Gérôme Drawing Course (_Cours de dessin_), reproduced here in
its entirety, is a famous and fabled publication of the late nineteenth
century. Divided into three parts, it contains 197 loose-leaf
lithographic plates of precise drawings after casts, master drawings,
and male models, all arranged in a somewhat progressive degree of
difficulty. The course was designed to prepare beginning art students
copying these plates to draw from nature, that is, from objects, both
natural and man-made, in the real world. Like the curriculum of the
nineteenth-century Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris, whose ideals it
shared, it was designed so that the student using it could eventually
choose to render nature in both idealistic and realistic fashions. When
the Drawing Course was published in the late 1860s, it was still
generally assumed that the imitation of nature was the principal goal of
the artist, and that the most important subject for the artist was the
human body. The expression of the subject depicted had not yet been
replaced by self-expression.

Despite being both rare and arcane today, the Bargue-Gérôme Drawing
Course is one of the most significant documents of the last great
flowering of figure painting in western art, which took place in the
late nineteenth century. The present complete new edition will serve to
instruct contemporary students in figure drawing, to present an
important nineteenth-century document to historians, and to edify the
general art-loving public, collectors, and amateurs.

The plates in the Drawing Course are _modèles_, which in English would
be translated as “good examples to copy.” The course follows the
established routine in nineteenth-century art schools by beginning with
the copying of plaster casts, proceeding to master drawings, and
finishing with nude male models (_académies_). Since this tripartite
division of activities was taken for granted in the curricula of the
time, the plates were issued without instructions. Relying on the
expertise of contemporary teachers and practitioners of academic figure
drawing, the present editors have tried to indicate how these plates
might be taught in classes and used by individual students today.
Throughout, every attempt has been made to explain nineteenth-century
drawing theory and practice.

The present book also introduces the figure of Charles Bargue
(1826/27-1863), a lithographer and painter known now only to a small
group of connoisseurs, collectors, and art students. An attempt has been
made to clear his life of legend and to write a biography based upon the
scant surviving evidence. His painted oeuvre is small, and only about
fifty titles have been recorded. Of those, only half have been located,
most of which are in private collections. His Drawing Course is known to
only a few through stray and scattered surviving sheets and from the
hitherto only known complete set of the Drawing Course in the National
Art Library, Victoria and Albert Museum, London. In 1991 two further
complete sets were made public as a result of the founding of the Musée
Goupil in Bordeaux. The plates reproduced in this book were selected
from these two sets. To make the introduction to Bargue more complete,
an illustrated and annotated listing of all his known paintings has been
included as well.

The first two sections of the Drawing Course were intended for use in
the French schools of design, or commercial and decorative art schools.
It was believed that in order to produce articles of commerce and
industry that could compete on the international market, designers of
utilitarian objects would benefit from knowing the guiding principles of
good taste. (This was the argument in the brochure issued by Goupil &
Cie to advertise the course On Models for Drawing [_Des modèles de
dessin_]; see appendix 1 for an English translation of the text). Good
taste, or _le grand goût_, was based on classical form, which was
defined by the rarefied style of antique statuary. The combination of
good taste and the study of nature resulted in _le beau idéal_—the
rendering of nature in its most perfect manifestation—sometimes referred
to more specifically as _la belle nature_.

The third section on drawing after live models, by contrast, was issued
for use in art academies. Drawing after live models was discouraged or
even prohibited in European and American schools of design, that is, in
schools of commercial or applied arts, and was only seldom and
reluctantly included in their curricula; it was strongly felt in the
artistic establishment that commercial artists should not be encouraged
to develop aspirations or pretensions beyond their perceived abilities.
The _académies_ of the third part are examples of how the Neoclassicism
of the early-nineteenth-century academy was revised by the new interests
of the Realist movement. The Realists did not generalize their figures;
personal traits—even ugly ones—are observed and recorded. Bargue’s
presentation of the male nude, although realistic, is always graceful
and often noble.

The course sold well for at least three decades, including several large
printings for various institutions in England as well as France.
Individual plates were still sold by Goupil & Cie and its various
successors until the dissolution of the firm in 1911. The lithographs
were evidently worn out by use; some older art schools still have a few
surviving relics of the set, usually framed and hung on the studio walls
as examples of nineteenth-century assiduity.

The teaching of traditional academic practices almost died out between
1880 and 1950, as the number of academically trained instructors
gradually diminished. This decline was concurrent with a shift in
emphasis from an objective imitation of nature to a subjective reaction
to the world, or even to the abstract qualities of art itself. This was
a major revolution in art theory. Since antiquity Aristotle’s definition
of art as mimesis, or the imitation of nature, had dominated Western
thought and practice. Before the 1880s “expression” meant the emotion or
meaning conveyed by the subject—the person or thing depicted—not the
emotional state of the artist, as in today’s “self-expression.”

The Drawing Course reveals what the last generations of traditionally
trained representational artists were taught to copy and admire.
Scholars investigating artists trained between the Franco-Prussian War
and World War I will find that this book helps them understand the
training and early work of their subjects. It is well known, for
example, that Vincent van Gogh worked independently through the course
more than once,’ and that Picasso copied Bargue plates at the Barcelona
Academy. Many early drawings by artists of this generation thought to be
drawn from life may, in fact, be copies after the models in the
Bargue-Gérôme Drawing Course.

Today most art schools have dispensed with teaching drawing after
plaster casts as an integral part of learning how to draw; and the modem
life class differs greatly from the academic life class. Whereas the
earlier training emphasized accuracy, solidity, and finish, modern
instruction emphasizes gesture and self-expression, which often results
in a nonacademic exaggeration of forms. Earlier the model held one pose
for many hours, even weeks; modern life-drawing poses are very short; an
hour is considered in many studios to be a long pose.

Many modern teachers and practitioners believe high finish is mechanical
and inimical to self-expression. Furthermore, the modem teaching of
anatomy is cursory. Modern drawing classes neglect the organic structure
and unity of the model. Students in drawing classes are allowed to draw
approximate sections of bodies and to accept multiple test lines and
accidents without correcting or erasing them. A persistent modern view
holds that there are no mistakes in a work of art. The only criterion is
the artist’s intention.

By contrast, a good academic drawing—today as in the nineteenth
century—should be accurate and finished, concerned with organic unity,
and devoid of superfluous details. Careful academic practices not only
develop patience but also train the student to see mistakes and correct
them. In addition, academic theory urges the student to make continuous
reference to nature in order to avoid excessive personal expression or
mannerisms (_maniera_ [transcriber’s note: it’s _manières_ in French]).
The human figure is viewed and painted with respect, without detachment
or a sardonic air of superiority on the part of the artist. The academic
tradition exalts the human body.


Public Controversy Over Teaching Materials

The catalyst of the Bargue-Gérôme Drawing Course was an official
controversy about how best 10 teach drawing to French students of design
and industry. A Parisian exhibition of student work 1865 by the Central
Union of Applied Arts (_Union centrale des Beaux-Arts appliqués_) caused
much consternation. Eight thousand drawings and sculptures by students
from the art departments of 239 public educational institutions had been
put on display; officials and critics were united in decrying the
exhibits as very poor in quality. Since early drawing education in the
industrial and decorative art schools consisted mainly of copying after
prints or casts, the general conclusion was that they had been given
poor models.

At the exhibition’s awards ceremony the sculptor Eugène Guillaume
(1822-1905), director of the École des Beaux-Arts, verbalized his
colleagues’ dissatisfaction: “The main ingredient of art is taste. On
this account, we are afflicted by the weakness of the models that are
called upon to develop it. To place before the eyes of beginners in our
schools examples devoid of all ennobling sentiments, to have copied
engravings and lithographs of a false style, of incorrect drawing, of
schematic method—this amounts to the corruption of the taste of the
nation; it makes the development of vocations impossible. These
fundamentals of [art] instruction must be rigorously reformed.”

Ernest Chesneau (1833-1890), an art critic who became an inspector of
fine arts in 1869, delved further into the problem in a series of
articles published in _Le Consitutionnel_. Although he, too, expressed
his unhappiness and dissatisfaction with the works on display, he saw a
silver lining:

  [T]he great benefit of this exhibition will be its having opened the
  most obstinately closed eyes; of forcing the opinion of a few to
  become the general opinion; of leading, we hope, to a complete
  reorganization of the teaching of drawing. A reform as radical as
  this, I can’t deny, is very difficult to achieve, but it has become
  absolutely necessary after the lamentable spectacle that offered
  us—under the pretext of drawing—a run of over a thousand meters . . .
  of everything that black and white together could create of inept,
  ridiculous, and poverty-stricken forms, deprived, with practically no
  exceptions, not only of any of the feelings of art but also distant
  from any resemblance, from any shadow of the foundations of the
  science of drawing: accuracy, life, beauty. . . . The lack of models!
  that is the dominant cry among the complaints provoked by the
  examination of the exhibition. . . .

As an official reaction to the complaints of Guillaume, Chesneau, and
others, the Ministre de l’Éducation Publique formed a committee to
review available models.


Goupil Proposes a Solution

The demand for better models presented an opportunity that the
publishing house of Goupil & Cie could not ignore. In 1868 it published
a handsome twelve-page brochure in small quarto entitled On Models for
Drawing (_Des modèles de dessin_). With the self-righteous tone of an
official government proclamation, the brochure pompously advertised the
Bargue-Gérôme Drawing Course, which was already in print, more than half
the plates having been released:

  All the known models and pattern books were passed in review [by a
  commission specifically appointed for this purpose]; but these models,
  for the most part, were those that M. Guillaume had just denounced as
  corrupters of taste…
  Thus it was left to individual initiative to solve the problem. Men of
  taste and learning applied themselves and a certain number of good
  models have been published. . . . The Maison Goupil could not remain a
  stranger to an effort having as its object the response to such a high
  degree of contemporary concern; it, too, set to work, and with the aid
  of some practical men it has designed a program whose execution has
  been entrusted to some distinguished artists…
  Monsieur Charles Bargue, with the association of Monsieur Gérôme,
  Member of the Institute, was put in charge of the models for drawing
  the figure.
  In the choice and execution of these models no concessions were made
  to the pretty or to the pleasant; their severity will doubtlessly
  discourage false vocations; they will certainly repulse those who
  think of drawing as an accessory study, a pleasant pastime; thus, it
  is not to such students that these are offered, but to those who
  seriously wish to be artists.

The _Drawing Course_ was not unique; there were many others on the
market. Around 1860, for example, Bernard-Romain Julien (1802-1871) had
published his own course. It was designed for use in the public schools
of France, a fact it proudly declared on the title page. It parallels
the Bargue-Gérôme course by beginning with details of the face and
proceeding to full views of antique statuary. The plates are in a
refined, linear, Neoclassical style, yet they might have been the very
models against which Chesneau and the committee had reacted. It is hard
to see the beautiful Julien plates as “debased,” but their elaborately
stylized refinement might have made them impractical models for the
teaching of basic drawing skills.

[Fig. 1]

Julien’s drawing of a head, possibly a Diana (fig 1), would be
bewildering to a beginning student, and the schematic view to the right
would not be very helpful. The delineation of the profile between the
forehead and nose is subtle, with almost invisible modulations. The hair
is complex and would discourage a novice. Furthermore, the dexterous
cross-hatching could only be achieved with years of practice. The
frontal, diffused lighting supports the clarity of the Neoclassical
style but offers no indication of the underlying structure of the head,
something needed by students with little experience of anatomy. Bargue,
on the other hand, offered clues on how to manage the essential forms of
the head and espoused a method to make long, modulated lines easier to
manage by abstracting complicated curvilinear outlines into straight
lines and angles.

[Fig. 2] [Plate I, 43]

Another Julien plate (fig, 2) depicts the head of the Roman empress
Faustina, after a cast also used by Bargue, albeit viewed from another
angle (plate I, 43). The Julien drawing omits the back of the head. The
lack of a complete outline could lead to errors in the placement of the
interior features. (Bargue depicts the entire cast first as a simple
outline of points, lines, and angles, making it something measurable.)
Julien has drawn the profile of the nose with a straight line, and the
hair has been reduced to the demarcation of simplified shadows, with
just a few lines. Bargue profits from direct, focused overhead lighting,
giving a sense of presence to the figure and revealing the sitter’s age.
Julien’s penchant for frontal lighting underplays the structure and
character of his models.

[Fig. 3] [Fig. 4]

A direct comparison of the _Homer_ (_Homère_) by Julien (fig. 3) and the
one by Bargue (fig. 4) more clearly reveals the different approaches of
the two courses. In both the drawing is excellent, tight and accurate.
However, the proliferation of hatching in Julien’s example confuses the
relationships of the various volumes of the face. Bargue works tonally,
logically progressing from light to dark. The result is a greater range
of value from black to white, providing more drama, unity, and volume.
I’s almost as if Julien were emphasizing the decorative aspects of the
antique bust as opposed to Bargue’s stress on the sculptural qualities.


The Organization of the Drawing Course

In the Goupil catalogue of 1868 the Drawing Course was announced as
Models and Selected Works for the Teaching of the Arts of Design and for
Their Application to Industry (_Modèles et ouvrages spéciaux pour
l’enseignement des arts du dessin et pour leur application à
l’industrie_). The first part was already in print; the second part,
Models after Masters of All Periods and All Schools (_Modèles d’apres
les maîtres de toutes les époques et de toutes les écoles_) was in
progress,

The first part, Models after Casts (_Modèles d’après la bosse_),
consisted of seventy plates and was described as “in itself a basic and
[systematically] progressive course with the purpose of giving the
student the capacity to draw a complete academic figure.” The publishers
were proud that “hardly had the first plates of the [first part of the]
course been finished when the city of Paris ordered a special printing
for the city schools, and in England the course was adapted by the
numerous [educational] institutions supervised by the South Kensington
Museum (now the Victoria and Albert Museum).” In many instances the
Bargue-Gérôme course must have replaced the Julien course.

The brochure vaunts the selection of drawings for the second part:
“These models were intended to develop in the soul of the students a
feeling and taste for the beautiful, through familiarizing them with
creations of a pure and noble style as well as with healthy and vigorous
transcriptions of nature” (see appendix 1). It would be completed in
1870 as a set of sixty lithographs by Bargue after renowned old and
modern masters.

The third part, Charcoal Exercises in Preparation for Drawing the Male
Academic Nude (_Exercices au fusain pour préparer à l’étude de
l’académie d’après nature_), contained sixty plates and was completed in
1873. It was not mentioned in the brochure of 1868, and when it was
published, it had only Bargue’s name on the frontispiece, without a
mention of Gérôme (fig. 5). This was the case because almost all of the
subjects are original figure drawings by Bargue. Moreover, as was
postulated earlier, the inclusion of drawings of nude males to be copied
was a logical step after the first two volumes but presumably was not
originally thought of as part of the course. Part II was likely
disassociated from the first two volumes since it was intended for use
in the fine arts schools instead of industrial and decorative arts
schools. Possibly Gérôme’s role as a collaborator on the project may
have expired after the first two editions, or perhaps Gérôme simply
respected Bargue’s growing prowess and generously delegated the task to
his colleague.



PART I: DRAWING AFTER CASTS (_MODÈLES D’APRÈS LA BOSSE_)


Introduction

The first section, Models after Casts (_Modéles d’après la bosse_),
teaches the student how to systematically draw after casts by offering a
collection of plates depicting casts of both partial and complete male
and female bodies. Most of the casts are after famous ancient
sculptures, but a few are taken directly from life. They represent a
selection that was duplicated, at least in part, in the collections of
most European and American art schools,

There are several advantages to using casts as drawing models. Their
immobility permits extended study of a single view or pose; and since
they are usually white or painted in a light color, they provide an
easier reading of the values of light and shadow on their surfaces.
Moreover, the opinion has long persisted that copying casts of ancient
sculpture develops good taste. One of the major goals of this course was
to teach such elevated taste (_le grand goût_), the proper selection
from among the features and accidents of nature. Antiquity has long held
the reputation for having gleaned the ideal human form from among the
idiosyncrasies of individual physiognomies and bodies. The resulting
classical style was for many centuries almost synonymous with good
taste, and its goal was the depiction of _la belle nature_, the
representation of natural forms in their purest and most beautiful
manifestations, without flaws or accidents. The style is recognized,
indeed, defined by clarity, continuity of outline, geometric
simplification of shapes, and the rhythmic ordering of forms.

In practice, the classical style sustains the integrity of each
individual part of a form while containing the part in a larger, unified
whole. The Greek temple facade, for example, presents a unified
composition in which the parts are clearly separable and identifiable:
the pediment; the entablature; the columns with their abacus, capital,
shaft, and base; and the platform. Each part is independent in the
exactness of its shape and the precision of its finish, yet each element
is still a necessary part of a harmonious whole—that is, taken together
they form a column that, in turn, is a part of the facade. Precision,
assurance, clarity of form, the independence and interdependence of the
parts: these traits make even a fragment of a Greek statue—a foot, a
hand, a head, a limbless torso—an admirable, unified object in itself,
while still alluding to the harmony of the lost whole.

[Fig. 6]

Until recently art critics and historians chose the most idealizing
period of Greek art as the high point of ancient art and named it the
classical period (450400 B.C.). Even so, the works of the sculptors
(Myron, Phidias, Polykleitos) and the major painters of the day
(Apollodorus of Athens, Zeusis of Herakleia, Timanthes and Parrhasios)
were known only from descriptions in literary sources and copies.
Moreover, the few known copies of the paintings are particularly
debased. This choice of one period as representative of ancient art
ignores the energetic, inventive, and lengthy stylistic evolution of
Greek and Roman sculpture, which expressed a variety of mental and
spiritual states over a period spanning more than a thousand years,
maintaining high quality while continuing to use the classical
style—which was long past its period of dominance—or certain purposes,
such as giving dignity to portrayals of gods or statesmen. For centuries
critics ignored the production of preclassical statuary as “primitive,”
and decried the postclassical production as “decadent.” _Le grand goût_,
based on the art of the classical period (and of the major masters of
the Italian High Renaissance), was thought of as the model for
representational art. This classical ideal dominated art theory and
teaching until it was challenged by the Realist movement of the
mid-nineteenth century. After 1850 a new generation of students caught
up in the principles of Realism rebelled against the practice of drawing
after casts because they believed the classical conventions practiced in
ancient sculpture prevented them from seeing nature accurately. For
example, the young American painter Thomas Eakins (1844-1916) was a
student in Gérôme’s atelier at the École des Beaux-Arts in Paris during
the 1860s. The students drew from life and then after casts, alternating
every three weeks. Already a stubborn American Realist at eighteen,
Eakins stayed home during the weeks devoted to drawing after casts.

[Fig. 7]

Two fine paintings, one by Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres entitled
Achilles Receiving the Ambassadors of Agamemnon (_Les Ambassadeurs
d’Agamemnon_) (fig. 6) and the other by the American master Thomas P.
Anshutz, a student of Eakins, entitled The Ironworkers’ Noontime (_La
Pause de midi des ouvriers métallurgistes_) (fig, 7) clearly demonstrate
the differences between the Neoclassicism at the start of the nineteenth
century and the Academic Realism of the second half of the century. Both
feature a row of masculine bodies—albeit a bit less nude in the
Anshutz—all with varied features in assorted traditional studio poses.
Ingres sets out a sample set of classical types: the youthful Apollonian
hero Achilles; the younger Praxitilian Patrocolus; the slender,
Mercurial Ulysses; and the Herculean Ajax. All are adaptations of
classical statuary in Rome or Naples, and each represents one of the
ages of man (the set is completed by the melancholic, brooding, elderly
Briseus in the middle ground and the children playing in the distance).

The poses used by Anshutz are based on common studio poses. The
underlying classicism is somewhat disguised by the non-idealized
portrait heads, individualized bodies, and the recording of specific
accidental traits (such as the sunburn patterns). Whereas Ingres uses a
general light with just enough shadowing to model his figures, Anshutz
imitates the sunlight of high noon, with resulting strong shadows,
which, however, do not distort the forms. Nonetheless, both stick to the
classical tradition of a frieze of figures united by their rhythmic
placement and movement across the picture plane. Ingres’s characters
exist in the timeless world of mythology; Anshutz’s figures are placed
in a specific modem context, a factory yard. Thus, despite their
differences, the two paintings are strongly related, demonstrating that
Academic Realists retained, albeit latently, many of the interests,
habits, and practices of Classicism.

The use of casts in the teaching of drawing gradually diminished until,
by the 19205, it was hardly practiced. By the 1950s even the once strict
practice of drawing after live models had become merely a freehand
event, without direction or criticism, and certainly without system or
method. The result was a decline in the quality of objective painting
even by artists who wanted to maintain traditional standards.

Throughout the twentieth century the grand cast collections in the
academies and art schools, which had been assembled with such effort and
cost for over a century, were sold, given away, destroyed, or left to
languish in corridors, subject to student pranks and mutilation.

Against the history of these changes, the Bargue-Gérôme Drawing Course
can be seen as an attempt to balance contemporary Realism with the
practices of classical Idealism. The authors intended to teach a method
of drawing the human figure from nature with good taste, to instill in
their students a practice based on careful selection, simplification,
and a knowledge of the structure of the human figure. The method taught
was newly informed with the excitement of the Realist movement of the
mid-nineteenth century, and for a while—even against the incoming tide
of modernism—the combination supported the creation of great modern
history and genre paintings.

The abandonment of the study of the classical ideal in the last quarter
of the nineteenth century was a serious break in an established yet
vital artistic tradition. After all, Western art is an artificial
activity that became self-conscious in antiquity and again in the
Italian Renaissance, each time articulating an intellectual, apologetic
theory of art that continued to influence the creation and teaching of
painting over the centuries. The twentieth-century break in this
developed tradition is problematic for young, contemporary artists who
may not be attracted by the many schools and movements of modernism but
are instead drawn to the imitation of nature. Without access to the rich
lore and methods of humanist figure painting, they find themselves
untrained and under-equipped for many of the technical problems that
confront them as Realists. Without help, today’s young Realist artists
may end up uncritically copying superficial appearances, randomly
selecting from nature, and unwittingly producing clumsy and incoherent
figures.


Practical Matters: Using the Plates as Models to Copy

The Schemata or Plans

Most of the plates in part I of the Bargue-Gérôme Drawing Course contain
two images: a finished drawing of a cast beside a linear schema. The
schema, usually to the left, is a guide on how to accurately simplify
the optical contour (_mise en trait_) of the cast next to it before
starting on the actual depiction of the cast. The schema suggests a
useful set of reference lines and sometimes a geometric configuration,
around which it would be easy to organize the contours of one’s own
drawing (see, for example, the triangle drawn around and through the
foot in plate I, 5). (The diagrams themselves should not be copied
exactly but should be used as guides on how to begin a drawing)
Furthermore, the course presents only generalized rules on procedure;
there seems to be no basic underlying formula. However, you should
develop a working procedure of your own with reference to examples
provided by the course. At the end of part I, when copying the last
highly finished plates without a model schemata, you will have to rely
on the experience gained from drawing the earlier examples.

The actual drawings after casts were probably done by several—even
many—artists from Gérôme’s circle of students and friends. We know the
name of just one, Lecomte du Nouy. (1842-1923; see “The Drawing Course”
section of the Bargue biography in the present study), and we can safely
venture the name of another, Hippolyte Flandrin (1809-1864; see comment
to plate I, 70). Bargue copied their drawings on stone for printing as
lithographs. The accompanying schemata all exhibit the same penchant for
the use of angles, clarity in execution, and simplification of contours;
it seems safe to assume that Bargue drew the schemata for the drawings
as he copied the finished models on stone; they represent the unifying
method of part I. However, there are a few plates where the schemata are
less clear (for instance, plate I, 42) and schematized without a
specific underlying method. The eyes in plate I, 1, for instance, are
not organized around an unvarying point where the plumb line and the
horizontal cross each other—say, the pupil—or the inner comer of the
eye; instead the crossing point seems to have been chosen at random. In
contrast, the other Bargue schemata are clear in purpose, skillfully
organized, and based on carefully chosen angle points.

This chapter introduces and defines some terms that will be used in
describing a systematic procedure for copying the model drawings. There
are, of course, other methods, and if you are copying the Bargue
drawings under supervision, the teacher or drawing master may suggest
alternative procedures.

Start with the first drawing, work your way through the rest in
sequence, or skip ahead judiciously based on your increased skill or the
permission of your instructor. You will quickly note that each
subdivision of part I ends with a challenging, highly finished drawing;
the section on legs, for instance, ends with the fully modeled drawing
of the legs of Michelangelo’s Dying Slave (plate I, 30).

You will soon come to appreciate the skill that produced these plates,
as well as their exceptional refinement. Even if you do not understand
what you are copying, continue to work with accuracy. Sometimes you will
not know exactly what a line or a shadow describes until you have
correctly rendered it. By grasping Bargue’s achievement, you will raise
your own power of observation and simplification.

Materials

The lithographs were made after charcoal drawings and were intended to
be copied in charcoal. You should use this medium if you have adequate
command of the technique. Use natural kiln-dried vine charcoal in
sticks, and reserve charcoal pencils for finishing (the binder used in
them makes their lines difficult to erase). Only charcoal can equal the
intensity of the blacks in the reproductions, and vine charcoal erases
easily. However, you should not use it as a beginner without
instruction; the use of charcoal presents too many difficulties to solve
by yourself.

If you are a beginner, or if you prefer pencil, you should have a
selection of well-sharpened grades—2H through B2 (remember that pencils
softer than HB are difficult to use without producing slick, shiny
surfaces)—and a good, kneadable eraser. Pencil cannot achieve the same
density of darkness as in the plates. Any attempt to produce similar
shadows with pencil will result in a multitude of loose flecks of carbon
that will repeatedly spoil other areas of your drawing. Strive instead
for overall lighter shadows and relatively lighter halftones.

Some of the more detailed plates need to be enlarged before you can copy
them. Use a good color laser printer to have them magnified two or three
times. The original plate size is 60×46 centimeters (24×18 inches). In
their present size, you might not be able to see or copy many of the
fine details, especially if you are working in charcoal. Regardless of
the drawing ‘medium used, you need high-grade, well-sized paper with a
slight tooth and a surface that can take much erasure. Seek the advice
of your art-supply dealer or artists you know. Inferior materials will
lead to frustration and keep you from finishing the drawing accurately
and neatly.

Drawing Terms

A _point_ is a dot or mark without dimensions on a drawing surface. A
_line_ is a mark generated by extending a point (dot) between two points
on a flat surface. Two lines that intersect or join form an _angle_.
Points, lines, and angles constitute the basic elements for constructing
the _contour_ or _outline_ (_mise en trait_), the visual outer shape of
an object.

Basically, drawing is the act of choosing critical elements from nature
and recording them on paper while preserving their relationships. As you
study the relationships of points, lines, and angles observed in nature,
ask yourself: Is one point higher or lower than the other? Is one line
longer or shorter than another? Is one angle more or less acute or
obtuse than another? Asking these questions and making such comparisons
will enable you to analyze and record the shape of the Bargue cast
drawings or of any other object.

One of the goals of the course is to teach you to estimate distances,
angles, and relationships with your eye. Some students use a pencil, a
knitting needle, a taut piece of string, or a plumb line—held with
outstretched, locked arms and one eye closed—in order to more accurately
measure the distances between certain points on the model and on their
paper. This practice requires that you always look at the drawing or
object from exactly the same unvarying position (see appendix 2). Some
students also use a ruler or an angle with a protractor, which may save
hours of frustration. However, you should train your eye to estimate
these distances without recourse to tools.

Suggestions for Copying the Plates

_Step 1_: Make your drawing the same size as the plate you are using.
This will facilitate direct comparison with the model. Then begin each
drawing by locating the extreme points on the cast: the highest point,
the lowest one, and those to the left and the right. Complex poses with
extended arms, feet, and joints may require another dot or two to
circumscribe. Make approximate marks for these four points on the paper.
When joined by contour lines, they will form an irregular rectangle or
shape that contains the basic shape of the cast and fixes the overall
proportions. You will develop a more concise contour of the subject
within this rectangle by measuring more angle points on the contour of
the subject and placing them on the drawing, using your rectangle as a
guide.

_Step 2_: As an organizational tool, draw a vertical reference line
(hereafter referred to as a plumb line except in cases where the term
might be ambiguous) on the paper by either copying the one from the
schema or from the highest point of the cast. This line not only shows
how the peak of the cast relates to the lowest point but also reveals
how interior points for features inside the outline relate to each
other. Since many of your initial calculations will be approximate, the
plumb line becomes an invaluable empirical device. Additional vertical
reference lines can assist in the understanding and drawing of complex
areas.

_Step 3_: See which interior points the plumb line crosses on the plate
and mark them on your drawing. For example, on plate I, 43 (_Faustina_)
(_Faustine_) the plumb line intersects the top of the head and crosses
through the left brow and the top of the eye. It then passes closely by
the left nostril, conveniently touches the left comer of the mouth, but
misses the bottom of the cast. From this line one concludes that the
inward comer of the left eye relates directly to the left comer of the
mouth. This is the type of observation about internal relationships that
one should continually make as the drawing progresses.

_Step 4_: After establishing the verticals, examine the horizontals. For
example, the right extremity of plate I, 43 occurs near the hairline
overhanging the projection of the nose. The line drawn horizontally
across the brow indicates that the width between the plumb line and the
ear on the left is much greater than the distance from the same line to
the edge of the right brow. Judge by sight the distances from the
central plumb line to other points or angles on the contour and the
cast; then mark their positions in your drawing. When you are drawing an
entire figure and are looking at the head or feet from your standing
position, do not move your head up or down, just the eyes. Failure to
hold the head steady often results in elongated legs.

[Plate I, 43] 

_Step 5_: Your drawing should now resemble plotted points on a graph,
locating the heights and widths of the contours and interior features.
Observe the angles that would be formed if the lines were connected;
then join them with reference to the Bargue schema. Since the junctures
of the plumb line and horizontal reference lines form right
(ninety-degree) angles, use them to judge the relative degree of other
angles. If the angles appear too acute or obtuse, study the finished
model and correct them. Break curved lines into a series of two or more
straight lines. For example, in plate I, 43 two straight lines describe
the upper right brow, but seven straight lines plot the complexities of
the ear. The Bargue plates offer many examples of how to abstract a
complex contour into straight lines. Occasionally slightly curved lines
are used instead of straight ones.

However, almost all curves can be reduced to straight lines that cross
at the apex. Breaking up curves into straight lines enables you to
ascertain the exact inflection point and amplitude of the curve. When
you draw curves unaided, they tend to become arcs. Moreover, when
drawing an arc it is hard to know when to stop.

Noting anatomical landmarks can be helpful at the outset in order to
accurately draw the outline and establish the proportions. For example,
the indentation on the right side of the nose and the pit of the neck
are indicated within the outlines on plate I, 43. Likewise marks are
made for some interior forms of the ear. These notations will vary from
one cast to another. Looking up unfamiliar areas or parts in anatomy
books and learning their names will help clarify your thinking.

[Plate I, 43] 

_Step 6_: The next step is drawing the boundaries of the shadows. At
this point your copy should appear relatively close to the preliminary
schema or—if the plate has three steps—the second one. In plate I, 34
(_Dante_) (_Dante_), the division between shadow and light is indicated
with a line. For the most part the shadow line is a generalization of
the shadow’s complex meandering across the cast, 50 do not make it
emphatic. Squinting at the model will help in discovering this dividing
line between light and shadow, for it will consolidate the dark masses.
So will looking at it in a black mirror. Do not outline the halftones
(sometimes referred to as half-tints, from the French _demi-teinte_).

To repeat, begin each cast drawing by determining the most important
points and general angles (with the aid of a plumb line or some other
tool). Do not attempt to transcribe curves; average them with a series
of straight lines. Concentrate on the large forms while ignoring small
ones. Continually examine and correct the outline; anticipate the next
set of more complex points, straight lines, and angles before attempting
any modeling.

Values and Modeling

In art theory and practice, the term value refers to the relative
lightness or darkness of an area exposed to light (some writers
substitute tone for value). It can also be used to describe the absolute
brightness of an object (seen or imagined as being without shadow or
reflection on its surface). This even value is sometimes called the
focal value of the object. For example, a gray object has a darker local
value than a white one.

In nature, values reveal the geometry of an object in relation to a
light source. For instance, each side of a cube will have a different
value because each has a different spatial orientation to the light
source, a different amount of received light, and—to the viewer—a unique
perspective. Similarly, the values will be affected by the kind of light
hitting it (direct, diffused, or reflected) and by the strength of that
light source (bright or dim). These distinctions all present difficult
problems for the artist.

In drawing, the transcription of the relative values of an object is
called modeling. There are three techniques for modeling: stumping
(_estomper_), veiling (_grainer_), and hatching (_hacher_). Stumping is
the rubbing of the drawing medium into the paper, usually with the
pointed end of a paper tightly rolled into a stick, called a stump
(_estompe_). Due to its cleanliness and precision, the stump is
preferable to the fingertip. Stumping produces a soft, atmospheric
effect.

The second technique, veiling, involves the drawing of faint lines with
the pencil or charcoal tip lightly over the paper’s grain. This
technique alters the value in a very subtle manner; the effect may
appear much like translucent veils or glazes. Veiling is useful when
modeling delicate forms in the light and where the curvature is gradual.

Hatching, the third method, is the building up of dark value by means of
thin parallel lines; when these lines cross each other at angles, it is
called cross-hatching. This is essentially an engraver’s technique. Some
purists who want all the effects in a drawing to be the product of pure
line favor hatching over stumping. Hatching can strengthen the modeling
achieved by stumping and veiling. Moreover, hatching adds linear
direction when drawn axially and helps to create the illusion of
foreshortening when drawn transversely in perspective.

Procedure for Modeling

_Step 1_: The same rule—work from the general to the specific—applies to
modeling as well as to line drawing. Begin with the large, dark,
generalized shadow; fill it in evenly while referring to the finished
drawing. You may schematize the boundaries in your drawing, but remember
that the edge of a shadow is seldom abrupt; still, an area is either in
light or in shadow and this difference must be made clear. Once added,
shadows give the illusion of sculptural relief.

In modeling the shadows, Bargue downplayed reflected light, which in
nature would flood the shadows of an actual white plaster cast. The
simple shadows were most likely maintained by using a controlled, direct
light and by placing the cast in a shadow box, a three-sided open box,
lined with black paper or cloth, which diminishes reflected light (see
glossary and section entitled “Excursus: Shadow Boxes” in appendix 2;
see also fig, 44).

Shadows record the effects of light and give the illusion of a shape
turning in space. A focused light source, with a fairly small aperture
(like a spotlight) emphasizes form and casts a shadow that starts out
sharp-edged but becomes diffuse as it moves away from the object casting
it. A general light, such as that produced outside at noon on a cloudy
day, would reduce the shadows to grayish halftones. Classical taste
emphasizes clarity of form over showy light effects; as a classicist,
Bargue used light to reveal rather than obscure form.

_Step 2_: After drawing the shadows, analyze the value of the halftones
and place them in the drawing. (A halftone is any variant of value
between light and dark—say, white and black. There are usually several
halftones, of graduated value, in a drawing.) In the early stages of the
course, the finished drawings are separated into three values: one for
the shadow; another for the halftone area, and the white of the paper
for the lights. Both the main halftone area and the shadows are clearly
indicated. However, the transition from the halftones to the light areas
requires care. Notice that the halftones can appear quite dark next to
the lights and be mistaken for shadow. On a scale of values from 1 to 9,
where 9 is the value of the paper and 1 is the darkest mark that the
pencil or charcoal can make, the halftones on a white cast are around
values 5 and 6. The average shadow is around 4, which is a little darker
than the value of the halftones.

_Step 3_: After the darkest, major shadow has been filled in, the
halftones are blended into the shadow and gradated toward the light
areas. This can be extended to complete the modeling by the recording of
every value. Plate I, 56 (Male Torso, back view) (_Torse d’homme, vu de
dos_) illustrates the gradual lightening of values from the shadow into
the halftones and from the halftones into the light, as well as the
delicate transitions within the light itself. Here, too, the halftones
and lighter values describe complex forms, as along the border of the
scapula and around the dimples near the sacrum. Pay attention to the
degree of lightness and darkness represented in the finished cast
drawing. Each value relates to the other values yet holds its place
within the total effect.

[Plate I, 56]

Notice the values of the halftones from area to area along the main
shadow. Where the curvature of form is more acute, there are few
halftones; a gentle curve produces more. Despite the range of values
used in the modeling of the torso, Bargue presented a simplification of
values and forms without a confusing proliferation of detail. Such
control is a hallmark of the classical style.

_Step 4_: In general, as the course progresses, the finished drawings
grow more complex and contain areas that may appear impossible to copy,
especially if you were to work from the plates in the book rather than
from enlargements, Resolve a complicated area by analyzing its essential
structure. For example, divide the multitudinous curls of a Roman
noblewoman into recognizable yet simplified masses or shapes. Squint at
the values to obfuscate distractions and to average the values into
discernable areas. Get a fresh view by looking at both your drawing and
the model in a mirror: backward, upside down, or even sideways. Each
step completed will make you aware of the next passage to work on.

Finishing the Drawing

Finish requires time and patience. However, as you gradually become
aware of how much you have learned by being careful and accurate, your
patience and enthusiasm will increase. Ask for criticism from
knowledgeable peers. Study your drawing; it is essential that you learn
to see and correct your errors yourself. You could also make a tracing
of your drawing and then lay it on top of the plate. Analyze what went
wrong, especially if you are working alone. Be strict with yourself. A
drawing can be stopped at any time, as long as there are no errors in
it.

Remember that the academic artists of the nineteenth century whom you
are learning to emulate in this course thought that finish denoted
professionalism, that it indicated an orderly mind and represented the
complete development of the artist’s idea. It was not uncommon for an
artist to spend months or even years to complete a work. Accept the fact
that classical drawing skills develop slowly and plan to use as much
time as needed—hours, days, or even months—to achieve a respectable
finish.


Notes on the Plates (I)

Parts of the Head (_Fragments de têtes._)

Plate I, 1. Eyes. (_Yeux._)

An old Neoplatonic premise has students starting their study of the
human physiognomy with the eye, “the mirror of the soul.” Even in the
early 1600s, in Odoardo Fialette’s engraved drawing course entitled The
True Method and Rules for Drawing All the Parts and Members of the Human
Body (Il vera moda et ordine per disignare tuttia le parti et membra del
corpo humano; Venice, 1608), the first plate is similar to this one.
Eyes exist in a complex anatomical setting that appears to change with
any slight turning of the head; they are difficult to reduce to
two-dimensional form.
These models will teach you to simplify the organization of the eye and
its surrounding structures.First draw the plumb line and the horizontal
on your drawing paper. Notice the organization of the angles of the
other lines around these two as you copy them. Begin with simple
lines—no shadows, no details; put down nothing that will detract from
the essential. This will help you approach the eye in its more complex,
natural setting.

Plate I, 2. Mouths. (_Bouches._)

Eight simplified schemata are paired with finished mouths viewed from
different angles. These models treat the mouth as a unit that includes
the nose and the chin; the student is taught to see the mouth integrated
in the surrounding organic structure of the face, continually varying in
shape and relationships as the view changes.The refined version has been
developed around the near straights of the schema, without following
them exactly. Without the careful control supplied by the guidelines,
the proportions would probably go awry.
In the foreshortened views, the line cuts through the center. You are
meant to get used to drawing foreshortened views right from the
start.These models are idealized views of nature, taken from classical
sculpture; the simplification of nature has already been done for you
twice: first by antiquity and again by Bargue.

Plate I, 3. Noses. (_Nez._)

The models are classical, some highly idealized. Just as the mouth was
considered as an organic part of a face, the nose is here seen in its
proper relationship to the eyes and mouth in profile. Several ways of
organizing the profile are suggested.The profile to the left is of Dante
Alighieri, the great Italian poet (see plate I, 34), and the profile to
the far right is that of Caracalla, the ill-famed Roman emperor (see
plate I, 38 and fig.15). In the center is an idealized Apollo type.
While studying the course, you are meant to build up a repertoire of
human types and a consciousness of the specific traits that denote age
and character.
The head of Dante is plotted with a single horizontal line through the
plumb line; the other schemata contain two or more. In most cases the
plumb line goes through the upper corner of the eye. This placement
helps to correctly measure the distance between the eye and the nose.

Plate I, 4. Ears. (_Oreilles._)

Ears are complicated, so this is an important plate that you should copy
repeatedly until you can draw ears correctly from nature. Look at the
finished drawings, and ask how you yourself would plot the main
lines.This plate introduces a new type of shadow called hatching, the
building up of shadows with parallel lines. The value of an area is
established by just a few lines crossing it. Even when they are somewhat
spread apart, many lines together can produce a shadow. Density may be
further increased by cross-hatching, that is, by crossing the first set
of parallel lines with another set. Neatness and regularity of stroke
are important in cross-hatching.

_Note_: It would help to look up the ear in an encyclopedia or an
anatomy book to learn the names of the different features (such as the
_helix_, the _ante-helix_, the _concha_ and the _tragus_). Knowing the
anatomical terminology will help your vision and memory by enabling you
to verbalize what you see.

Feet (_Pieds._)

Plate I, 5. Profile of a foot. (_Pieds de profil._)

This plate codifies the successive steps of the method promoted in the
course. First, a schematic diagram, supported by a plumb line, encloses
the subject. A large triangle has been abstracted from the perceived
shape of the foot. The points were plotted—perhaps with the aid of a
tool—by measuring locations and distances with the eye. The base of the
triangle plots the bottom of the foot; the other sides of the triangle
establish the perimeter of the cast; one goes along the back of the foot
to the heel, the other to the top of the big toe.In the second drawing,
after the accuracy of the straight lines had been checked, the outline
was further refined, realizing the shape of the foot.
Add the shadow line for the main, dark value (squinting will help you
see the shadows more distinctly, as would viewing the drawings in a
black mirror. In the third drawing the shape and shadows are refined.
After further checking the outline for accuracy, the shadows were filled
in with an even value, either by stumping or cross-hatching. At this
stage, if the plotting of points was not accurate, there will not be
room here and there for all the parts of the foot. If the plotting has
been accurate, a three-dimensional effect will be produced as soon as
the shadows are added. After the shadows are filled in, check your
outlines again. Do not be surprised if you have to make revisions to
both shadows and outline. After these corrections, gently soften the
merging of the shadows and the lights.

Plate I, 6. Heels. (_Pieds, talons._)

Two sets of heels are viewed from the left and from the right. Each set
includes a suggested schema of two transversals, or horizontal
construction lines, on the plumb or vertical reference line that in
theory have been drawn from nature, that is, from studying an actual
cast. Study the finished drawing until you can understand the logical
placement of the plumb line and the transversals. Then, after
corrections have been made and the outlines have been refined, fill in
the shadows and make necessary adjustments. These casts are from Greek
or Roman statuary, which means the foot has already been idealized and
simplified.

Plate I, 7. The foot of the gladiator. (_Pied du Gladiateur._)

This is the foot of what was once one of the most admired of ancient
sculptures, now known as the Borghese Warrior (see fig. 8) (The work was
long held to be the depiction of a gladiator. We know now that
gladiators wore heavy armor; the nudity here glorifies the soldier.) It
is signed by Agasias, son of Dositheos of Ephesus, and is now in the
Louvre Museum in Paris. Plaster casts of the statue were in virtually
every academy of art in Europe and the Americas. Discovered around 1611,
the statue was in the Borghese collection in Rome until 1808, when it
was bought by Napoleon Bonaparte and shipped to Paris. It has been
postulated that the subject shows a foot soldier attacking a mounted
enemy. He holds up his (lost) shield to ward off blows from above, while
at the same time trying to wound his adversary’s steed in the stomach.
We are looking at his back left leg; the weight of the lunge is on his
advanced right leg. The statue is intact except for the loss of the
metal sword and the shield.In the drawing the movement of the foot is
elegantly articulated, as in the spreading of the toes. After you have
carefully measured and transcribed the triangle of the schema, ask
yourself if you could use some horizontal transversals. Plot the angles
of contact on the right side of the foot with great care; every point
and every angle must be accurate.

[Fig. 8. Agasias of Ephesus. The Borghese Warrior (or The Borghese
Gladiator). (_Le Guerrier Borghèse, ou Le Gladiateur Borghèse._) Marble.
199 cm. (6 ft. 6 in.) Louvre Museum, Paris. Thought to be a copy of a
Greek bronze from the school of Lysippus, fourth century B.C.]

Plate I, 8. The foot of the Medici Venus. (_Pied de la Vénus de Médicis._)

This is the right foot of the much-restored statue of Venus, which for
centuries has been in the Rotunda of the Uffizi Gallery in Florence,
Italy (see figs. 9 and 10). This marble, signed by Cleomenes, son of
Apollodorus, is probably a copy of a Greek work in bronze. It was
considered the epitome of female beauty well into the nineteenth
century. The arms are restorations, probably of the early Renaissance.
To understand its former fame, look beyond the polished surface to the
balance of the pose, which runs through all the limbs, as well as the
rhythmical interrelations of the masses and the proportions (the latter
are better seen from the rear).The exquisite foot rises gracefully onto
the toes in a movement that evokes a response in every part of the body
as the weight shifts to the left foot. You will be given the whole leg
as a model in plate I, 29.
The drawing is the most refined encountered thus far, with gentle
transitions from the shadows to the lighter areas. Several important
areas of halftones must be added after the basic shadow has been
established. Make sure your schematic drawing is accurate. Note how
judiciously Bargue has simplified the two sides of the foot and the
toes.

[Fig. 9. The Medici Venus. (_La Vénus de Médicis._) First century A.D.,
probably a copy of a fourth-century B.C. Creek original. Marble. 153 cm.
(5 ft.) Uffizi Gallery, Florence.]

[Fig. 10. The Medici Venus, rear view. (_La Vénus de Médicis, vue de
dos._)]

Plate I, 9. The sole of the foot. (_Plante de pied._)

This foot seems drawn from nature or after a suspended cast taken from
nature. There is only one vertical organizational line, the
indispensable plumb line. Depending upon the size of the model and your
drawing, you might want to carefully add a transversal construction line
or two. The lesson here is in seeing large shapes and blocking them out.

_Note_: The heel, the big toe, and the plane of the foot are summarily
yet clearly outlined. Bargue leaves some shadow lines for you to
develop. Squint or use a black mirror to better view the shapes of the
shadows.

Plate I, 10. The foot of Germanicus. (_Pied du Germanicus._)

The statue, in the Louvre Museum in Paris (see fig. 11), is signed by
Cleomenes, son of Cleomenes, Athenian, and was carved during the reign
of Augustus ca. 20 B.C. For several centuries the statue was identified
as Germanicus, nephew of Emperor Augustus; for a while it was taken to
be a youthful portrait of Augustus: Octavius the Orator, Assimilated to
Mercury, that is, with a body type (thin and dry) and a pose usually
associated with Mercury, the god of commerce and cleverness (he is
thought to be throwing a die). Now it is labeled Honorary Funeral Statue
of Marcellus, Nephew and first Son-in-law of Augustus. At any rate, it
is a genuine ancient work of the Augustan period.
You will see two views of a leg of Germanicus in plates I, 25 and 27,
and a full rear view in plate I, 69. The master (or student supervisor)
of Gérôme’s atelier reported to Charles Moreau-Vauthier that, when the
atelier first opened in 1864, “during our first week of work the model
in Gérôme’s studio was an antiquity, Germanicus.” To refresh your memory
and technique, Bargue has here given you two preliminary steps: a simple
blocking out around a single plumb or reference line; then more detailed
schema with shadow lines and clearly planned work spaces for the
individual toes. It will still take some study, measurement, and
observation to refine the drawing and to fill in the shadows and the
halftones.

[Fig. 11. Germanicus (Honorary Funeral Statue of Marcellus, Nephew and
first Son-in-law of Augustus.) (_Germanicus_ [Statue honorifique et
funéraire de Marcellus, neveu d’Auguste].) ca. 20 B.C. Marble. 180 cm.
(71 in.) Louvre Museum, Paris.]

Hands (_Mains._)

Plate I, 11. Hands in profile. (_Mains de profil._)

This plate gives both an inside and an outside view of a hand resting on
a block. The view from the inside or thumb side uses the margins of the
block as organizational lines, along with several very useful diagonals,
the lower one showing the relationship of the ends of the fingers. Study
the diagonals; discern their sense before doing your own. Although
shadows are referred to, no shadow line is given; that is the next step.
Note the difference between the shadows on the lower part of the fingers
and that on the block; the former is built up by tight cross-hatching,
the latter is filled in solidly. The cross-hatching describes some
reflected light on the hand.
The view from the outside has the fingers pleasingly arranged. (You
should always be aware of decorative possibilities of finger
arrangement; when viewing depictions by other artists, study how they
pose hands and fingers.) Here the schemata have two functions: they help
you copy the drawing and show you how to look for organizing lines on
other casts you may study.
Plotting lines connect the ends of the fingers and the joints. Do not
memorize this _schéma_; such patterns are individual and do not apply to
different hands. Because of the irregular shapes of fingers, shadows are
an important part of their modeling. Here they set up a dramatic
pattern.

Plate I, 12. A Closed hand and a leaning hand. (_Main fermée et main appuyée._)

Turn the sheet clockwise to copy these drawings; the leaning hand is
pushing down on a ledge. The preliminary drawings for both views have
strong, simplified outlines. The upper part of the hand is just a single
line; the back another, although the wrist will protrude beyond it.
Bargue wants you to be general yet still precise in the beginning.

Plate I,13. Hand of Voltaire. (_Main de Voltaire._)

The French sculptor Jean-Antoine Houdon (1741-1828) was working on his
life-sized statue of the seated Voltaire (1694-1778) when the aged
philosopher died. It is known that Houdon made a death mask of Voltaire;
he may have made this mold of Voltaire’s hand at the same time. However,
it does not seem to match either hand of the finished statue, of which
there are three marble versions (at the Comédie Française in Paris, at
the State Hermitage Museum in Saint Petersburg, and at the Musée Fabre
in Montpellier).
Step 1 is a simplification of the form to a few lines, a geometrical
shape without complications, a freehand joining of measured points.
Bargue wants you to be concise in your first apprehension and sketching
of the form; he really wants you to see the organizing straight lines.
Does the simplification of the front part of the support help you in any
way? Bargue eliminates the middle point of the support in the hope that
you will learn a lesson in finding the smaller change of direction
relative to the two greater changes.
Step 2 fills in the fingers and the knuckles, clarifies the base, and
adds a major shadow line on the base. You must supply the shadow lines
for the fingers.
Step 3 reveals the form through the contrast of light and shadow and a
few reflected lights at the bottoms of the fingers.
Accuracy is important throughout; otherwise all the details cannot be
correctly

Plate I, 14. Hand holding a whetstone. (_Main de faucheur._)

This is a very elegant drawing; it demonstrates the structure and grace
of the hand in action. The first outline contains a set of angles at the
bottom along an external diagonal. The fingers are seen as a unit, with
an indication of the forefinger. Study the general shape at first. The
second stage plots the fingers and refines the outline. Some shadow
outlines are indicated, and some internal anatomical notations are
sketched in. During the final stage you should refine the contours and
develop the internal forms concurrently. Be accurate in both contours
and internal forms. Check the contours again after the shadows are in;
you may now see some parts that need correction.

Plate I, 15. Hand of a woman pressing her breast. (_Main d’une femme pressant son sein._)

This is a very delicate hand, slightly plump, with
dimples—indentions—instead of protrusions over the knuckles, an effect
also seen in the hands of babies.
In Step 1 the fingers are outlined with straights, although they curve.
At first curves are best seen as simple straight lines.

Plate I, 16. Hand of a woman holding a stone. (_Main de femme._)

This final, linear handling is a delicate presentation of all five
fingers of the hand without any complicated details or obtrusive
shadows. It is a classical hand, clear and complete in outline,
simplified, beautiful, without blemishes or the distortions of
perspective. (Bargue has been training your taste along with your
descriptive skills.)

Arms (_Bras._)

Plate I, 1 7. Arm of a man, horizontal position. (_Bras d’homme, horizontal._)

This new set of plates starts out with a simple outline drawing; a flat,
frontal light minimizes the internal anatomical features, with much of
the anatomy expressed through contour alone. Because the fist is pulled
back, the muscles of the forearm (in particular, the extensor muscles of
the forearm) are tightened, and the triceps of the upper arm are flexed.
(A knowledge of anatomy and its terminology will help you recognize,
identify, and understand what you see; as a consequence, you will avoid
making mistakes in drawing.)

Plate I, 18. Arm of a man, vertical position. (_Bras d’homme, vertical._)

The plumb line is through the center, down to the central knuckle. The
upper horizontal is through the olecranon process of the elbow, and the
bottom horizontal is through the lower external head of the ulna. A
curve organizes the knuckles. A shadow line runs the length of the arm;
it is strong in the preliminary drawing and very careful in the
characterization of form through contour in the finished drawing.
Note how the line of the right profile is precisely modulated; every
muscle and bone is indicated with great subtlety. Bargue teaches you to
see and express form through contour.

Plate I, 19. Flexed forearm of a man, interior view. (_Bras d’homme, ployé, intérieur._)

The plumb line and the transversal cross in the center of the drawing;
this helps divide the arm into easily manageable sections. The forearm
is strongly foreshortened; the preliminary drawing makes this clear. In
the finished drawing the overlappings prepared for in the preliminary
drawing) aid in the understanding of foreshortening. The contours of the
finished drawing give a sense of breadth and fullness.

Plate I, 20. Child’s arm, interior view. (_Bras d’enfant, intérieur._)

The horizontal crosses the central plumb line in the fold of the elbow.
The contours of the finished drawing are more accurate than in the
schema.

Plate I, 21. Child’s arm, exterior view. (_Bras d’enfant, extérieur._)

This is the same arm as in the previous plate (probably the model was a
life cast), this time seen from behind. The same coordinates are used
again.

Plate I, 22. Woman’s arm, bent [while pressing a piece of drapery to her shoulder]. (_Bras de femme, ployé._)

The preliminary drawing has only a plumb line through the center. The
outside contours are reduced to straight lines; be careful in plotting
these, especially on the right side, which has few internal features to
help. As you finish the right side, break it down into angles and turn
it into curves.
For the first time this example is fully modeled. Take care with the
delicate modeling across the ulna furrow (beginning at the elbow). Be
sure the plotting of the fingers is accurate in your drawing. Measure
and check until you are sure they are right before you start to refine
them. With so many points and angles, continually check for errors; they
will undoubtedly occur. The charm of the drawing depends upon the rhythm
of the fingers and the shadows, as well as upon the veil of shading
across the arm.

Plate I, 23. Man’s arm, bent. (_Bras d’homme, ployé, extérieur._)

This is the same arm, with the forearm in tension, as in Plate I, 9,
this time seen from the outside (externally). This view avoids the
foreshortening in plate I, 9. As in that plate, a single horizontal line
crosses the plumb line, breaking the arm into three parts. The shadow
line of the lower arm is indicated in the preliminary drawing, while
that of the inner elbow is not.

Plate I, 24. Arm of Moses, by Michelangelo. (_Bras du Moïse de Michel-Ange._)

Michelangelo’s statue of Moses, carved between 1513 and 1516, is in the
Church of San Pietro in Vincoli in Rome (see fig. 12). The strong right
arm of Moses holds the Tablet of the Laws in its hand. The drawing is
both intricate in its modeling and in its anatomical structure. Take
your time. If the contours are not right, the muscles will not fit in
their proper places. Continue to compare your work with the model.

[Fig. 12 .Michelangelo’s statue of Moses, carved between 1513 and 1516,
is in the Church of San Pietro in Vincoli in Rome]

Legs. (_Jambes._)

Plate I, 25. Leg of Germanicus in profile. (_Jambe du Cermanicus, profil._)

A view of the limb of the judiciously proportioned statue in the Louvre
Museum in Paris, now identified as Marcellus, the Nephew of Augustus.
This is the play leg, the free or non-weight-bearing leg of a body in
_contrapposto_ (an Italian term for the turning of the body on its own
axis); here the right leg, the support leg, bears the weight of the
body. (See fig. 11 for a photo of the Roman marble.)

Plate I, 26. Child’s leg, rear view. (_Jambe d’enfant._)

This is the leg of a robust child aged three or four years. The plumb
line is very close to the shadow line. In a young child fat predominates
over muscle. Even for soft, rounded forms Bargue uses straight lines.

Plate I, 27. Leg of Germanicus, front view. (_Jambe du Cermanicus, face._)

To better understand the posture of the leg, compare this plate with the
previous side view to the leg in plate I, 25. This is the play leg (as
opposed to the support leg); it is bent at the knee, so both the upper
and lower halves of the leg are seen with some foreshortening and the
muscles of the leg are taut. The middle of the knee is positioned over
the inner angle; the plumb line does not go through the center of the
lower leg. The main feature is the clarified articulation of the knee
and the foot, simplified in the tradition of ancient Greek statuary.
Many artists who learn this foot seem never to need another. Very Greek
is the furrow on the medial (inner) side of the tibia (shinbone).
Another Grecian feature is the fullness of the muscles of the calf, the
gastrocnemius (upper muscle) and the soleus (lower calf muscle). Note
the rhythm of the toes: the big toe is separated from the other toes,
which are seen together as a unit. Study the modeling on the periphery
on each side; they describe halftones, shadows as well as the
silhouette. Here an anatomy book would be useful in helping you identify
the anatomical parts indicated by the lines. You must learn to
distinguish what you know (about anatomy) from what you see on the
surface. To draw intelligently requires that you recognize what you see
as well as getting the form or shape right. However, do not add
anatomical features that you do not see; they will only distract from
clarity of form.

Plate I, 28. Leg of the Crouching Venus. (_Jambe de la Vénus accroupie._)

This Crouching Venus, a popular bronze statue once thought to have been
cast in the mid-third century B.C., was traditionally attributed to an
otherwise obscure ancient sculptor named Doidalses. This is the leg and
thigh of one of the many preserved (but still usually damaged) ancient
marble copies of the lost bronze. The goddess is at her bath; the upper
part shows her wringing the water out of her long hair while turning her
head to look at the observer. The muscles of the thigh are covered by
fat, transforming the contour to an amorphous but elegant curve. Break
it into straights as Bargue does. When it is hard to find a plumb line
that passes through several angles, put one in the center, as here. Then
a horizontal line will divide the drawing into manageable parts.

Plate I, 29. Leg of the Venus de Medici. (_Jambe de la Vénus de Médicis._)

This is the play leg of the famous Venus in the Uffizi Gallery whose
elegant foot we have already studied (see plate I, 8). Again a plumb
line is simply put through the center. The preliminary drawing shows you
how to abstract the angles in drawing the contours. Using a tool—your
plumb line or a Steel knitting needle—will help you locate the most
important angles in the Bargue drawing. Be accurate when putting down
the points. Check constantly. The lightness and grace in this leg will
help you appreciate and understand the reputation of this statue. (See
figs. 9 and 10 for photos of the antique marble.)

Plate I, 30. Legs of the Dying Slave, by Michelangelo. (_Jambes de L’Esclave mourant de Michel-Ange._)

The cast is from the lower part of a statue (See fig. 13) meant to
decorate the three-storied tomb of Julius II, which was planned by
Michelangelo for the Crossing of Saint Peter’s in the Vatican. The tomb
was never finish as planned, and the statue (ca. 1513) came into French
possession under François I and is now in the Louvre Museum in Paris. An
abbreviated version of the tomb is now in San Pietro in Vincoli in Rome,
which encases the famous Moses by Michelangelo (see plate I, 24 and
fig.12). The statue is thought to have a Neoplatonic meaning, the
leatherband around the chest being read as the bondage of the senses
that keeps the struggling soul from flying to heaven and experiencing
pure truths. This beautiful plate is meant to be the climax of your leg
studies; it features the legs in all their complexity, from the pelvis
to the feet. The two legs show the contrast of the play leg and the
support leg; the finished drawing is fully modeled.

[Fig. 13. Michelangelo. The Dying Slave (or The Prisoner). (_L’Esclave
mourant_. _Le Captif_.) ca. 1513. Marble. Height 235 cm. (7 ft. 8.5 in.)
Louvre Museum, Paris.]

Heads in Profile. (_Têtes de profil._)

Plate I, 31. Nero as a child. (_Néron, enfant._)

The head is a cast from a full, standing figure (now in the Louvre
Museum in Paris) of the future emperor as a schoolboy (ca. 45 A.D.) The
portrayal of people in profile is an ancient tradition that has survived
into modem times. It was used by the Greeks—and is still used by modem
artists—for portraits on coinage and memorials. The clarity of the view
makes it useful where identification should be easy, while adding
dignity to the subject.
Step 1 (see Suggestions for “Copying the Plates”) is not an easy one; it
would be even more difficult working from life. The sparseness of detail
(as in the hair) demonstrates how little detail is needed for
verisimilitude.

Plate I, 32. Cardinal Jiménez. (_Le cardinal Ximénès._)

Cardinal Jiménez de Cisneros (1436-1517?) was the grand inquisitor of
Castile. His features are extraordinarily complex; consequently Step 1
(See Suggestions for Copying the Plates) is highly analytical. Bargue
suggests how one may analyze the angles of the features from a plumb
line through the face, which is transversed by four horizontals. A
second plumb line down the back of the cast is drawn to keep one aware
that the back of the mask is not a perpendicular. The plumb line enables
you to locate the outside points and angles. Step 2 (See Suggestions for
Copying the Plates) is exemplary: the correction of the outline goes
hand in hand with the recording of the shadow line. In Step 3 (See
Suggestions for Copying the Plates) the full shadow is strong, without
halftones. The few halftones on the face describe textures. Note the
simplified and unified areas of halftones in the beard.

Plate I, 33. Young girl. Life cast. (_Jeune fille. Moulage sur nature._)

Casts made from living subjects were used in nineteenth-century studios,
just as they are today. (See fig. 14) which shows an artist and his
assistant making a cast of a model’s leg (see also plate I, 21.) Bargue
has placed the plumb line down the back of the cast and drawn a curved
line to organize the profile. This is quite similar to plate I, 31.

[Fig. 14.]

Plate I, 34. Dante. (_Dante._)

This is based on the purported death mask of the great poet in the
Palazzo Vecchio in Florence, which is now believed to be a later
concoction made after several fourteenth-century portraits of Dante, and
even they are of disputed authenticity. Even so, the formidable nose can
still be seen among the citizens of contemporary Florence. Neither the
schema nor the finished drawing is particularly elegant. Perhaps this is
a preexisting drawing by another hand, interleaved among the cast plates
because Dante was such a popular subject for artists in the nineteenth
century. The procedure is similar to that for the profiles above.
Despite the seeming irregularity of the face, five important points are
crossed by the plumb line. The lesson to be learned here is: do not be
dismayed by irregular heads.

Plate I, 35. The Cardinal de Birague, by Germain Pilon. (_Le cardinal de Birague, de Germain Pilon._)

Germain Pilon (1537-1590), the most notable of French Renaissance
sculptors, is represented by a figure from his famous tomb for Cardinal
René de Birague (1510-1583), completed between 1575 and 1590. The statue
of the kneeling prelate is now in the Louvre Museum in Paris. Cardinal
Birague was one of the instigators of the Saint Bartholomew’s Day
massacre. In Step 1 Bargue captures the character of the model with the
sure placement of his first angles and lines, a splendid drawing in
itself. The plumb line is from the highest point down the back; this
line permits the placing of the point of the nose. The two diagonals, up
and down from the nose, organize the rest of the face. The shadow line
is more indicative than descriptive. In Step 2 the outline is refined
and the shadow is filled in a full, fiat shadow without internal
modeling. There are many halftones describing details of the anatomy and
costume.

Plate I, 36. Marcus Brutus. (_Marcus Brutus._)

Marcus Junius Brutus (85-42 B.C.) was the adopted son of Julius Caesar
but nevertheless figured among the conspirators who assassinated the
dictator and thus—following Shakespeare—earned the most famous reproach
in western history. The work was felt important enough to be included
twice (see plate I, 50 for a frontal view), both times as full plates
without a schematic first step. Do your own schema.

Plate I, 37. Head of a horse, Parthenon. (_Tête de cheval, Parthénon._)

Although this horse is identified on the plate as coming from the west
pediment (_fronton occidental_) of the Parthenon in Athens (448-433
B.C.), it is actually from the east pediment. This sculpture is one of
the so-called Elgin Marbles, the remnants of the Parthenon sculptures in
the British Museum in London since 1816. All the sculptures of the
Parthenon are traditionally attributed to the sculptor Phidias, who
supervised the sculptural program of the two pediments of the temple and
sculpted the giant statue of Athena that graced the interior. Casts of
the “Phidian horse” spread quickly into the art academies of Europe and
the Americas, where it became the prime model for the horse despite or
perhaps because of its strong idealization. The idealization certainly
fits Bargue’s taste. Knowledge of the horse’s anatomy was essential to
artists before the invention of the automobile made their presence rare
in cities. A more difficult, foreshortened view of the horse’s head is
the subject of plate I, 47.

Plate I, 38. Caracalla. (_Caracalla._)

This is a famous Roman portrait bust of a Roman emperor who ruled in the
early third century A.D. It exists in several versions, most of them of
high quality, as would be expected of works from an imperial workshop.
The version in the Louvre Museum in Paris has a chipped nose, so this
cast may be from another version most likely the famous one in the
Farnese collection at the National Archéologie Museum in Naples. The
version at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York (see fig. 15) is
an example of how a good workshop could maintain high quality through a
number of versions, all based on a plaster or clay model of the emperor.
The model—perhaps made from life or from studies of Caracalla—stayed in
the workshop and, like a photographic negative of a famous
twentieth-century politician or celebrity, was used over and over as a
model for portraits of the emperor. Imperial portraits were displayed
throughout the Roman Empire in public places and buildings—particularly
in courts, where they were symbols of the emperor’s authority and
supported the authority of the rulings and judgments of the courts. The
presence of portraits of the head of State in courtrooms is still in
evidence today. Caracalla ruled as emperor from A.D. 210 to 217; his
reign, although short, was not a happy one. The personal power expressed
by the portrait borders on brutality.
In the schema, the plumb line is through the back, with a Crossing
horizontal touching the ear lobe and the bottom of the nose. The plumb
line was used to measure the points of the face, of which five are
joined on a diagonal. The organizational lines for the head are almost
abstract in some instances. You should be fairly advanced by now, both
in how you see, how you make notations, and how you develop them. Note
the abrupt change in values from the nose to the cheek; the light values
of the nose complete an arc of bright values from the crown of the head
and across the brow; the lighting for this cast drawing was carefully
set up to produce this dramatic effect. Pay attention to the fact that
these are not all areas of pure whites but also lightly veiled ones. You
should save this veiling for the last stages of the drawing. The
finished drawing is a good lesson in how to simplify hair; several
halftones are used.

[Fig. 15. Caracalla. (_Caracalla._) Marble. 36.2 cm. (14.25 in.) Third
centurv A.D. The Metropolitan Muséum of Art. New York (Samuel D. Lee
Fund, 1940.)]

Plate I, 39. Anne of Brittany, by Giovanni Giusti. (_Anne de Bretagne, de Jean Juste de Tours._)

This is the head of a recumbent tomb figure, a _gisante_, as sculptures
of the dead lying on their tombs are called. It is from the famous tomb
of Louis XII in the Cathedral of Saint-Denis in Paris, the burial place
of French royalty. Anne of Brittany, who died in 1531, lies next to her
husband, the king. An Italian about whom little is known, Giovanni
Giusti (active 1515-22) brought Italian Renaissance style and techniques
to France, where he was called Jean-Juste de Tours. The astonishing
realism of this dead head, however, is far from the idealism we expect
in Italian art of the sixteenth century. It is easier to draw this cast
as if she were standing up, but then you will not understand the sag of
the cheeks, the collapse of the neck, or the fall of the hair. Remember
that you are looking at her as if you were standing near her chest, so
that you see the underside of her chin; this view moves her ear up. The
construction lines of Step 1 are simple, clear, and very important . The
one horizontal organizes the face.

_Note_: It is absolutely necessary to get all the angles of the profile
between the chin and brow accurately or the anatomical details of the
face—mostly defined by shadows and halftones will never fit in. This is
a highly finished example for which you must devise your own first step
schema. Shadows dominate the piece, covering more than half the work.
Note the sophistication in the reflected lights visible in the shadows,
which are produced by careful cross-hatching on the neck. This was
probably meant to be the last model of this set.

Plate I, 40. Julia Mammaea. (_Julia Mamea._)

A Roman bust (third century A.D.) in the Capitoline Muséum in Rome. This
is the final example in the set of profiles even though the view is not
quite a perfect or pure profile. It is finished and rully modeled but
nonetheless simplified in its forms.

Heads in Three-quarter Views. (_Têtes de trois quarts._)

Plate 1, 41. The Capitoline Ariadne. (_Ariane du Capitole._)

The head alone has been cast from a full-standing figure in the
Capitoline Museum in Rome. The identification of the subject as the
mythical Ariadne and the attribution of the statue as after an original
by Praxiteles (Greek, fourth century B.C.) are no longer accepted. It is
now thought to be a statue of the god Dionysius (Bacchus), a somewhat
androgynous deity. This view is just off-profile, with three-quarters of
the area in shadow. The shadow lines in the schematic drawing are
masterful but by necessity approximate. Only by simplification can you
see the larger aspects of the angles without getting lost in _détails_.

Plate I, 42. Children, by François Flamand. (_Entants, de François Flamand._)

Flamand was probably a Flemish sculptor active in France during the
seventeenth or eighteenth centuries. The plotting lines of the baby’s
face are not very pretty in either schema, nor are the shadow patterns
of the finished work. The plate is useful nonetheless for what it
teaches about the proportions of a baby’s head.

Plate I, 43. Faustina. (_Faustine._)

Two Roman empresses are named Faustina, and both lived during the second
century A.D. The first was the wife of Antonious Pius and the second was
the wife of Marcus Aurelius—both exemplary emperors. Step 1 is a good
example of how to schematize a model with a few construction lines. The
plumb line goes through a corner of the eye and of the mouth and is a
good reference line that will show you where to start each day. The
longest horizontal is a good one, over ear and eyebrows. Subsidiary
angles can be easily developed for the eye, the bottom of the nose, the
bottom of the mouth, and so forth. The finished drawing has maintained
simplicity in form and observation.

Plate I, 44. The Psyché of Naples. (_Psyché de Naples._)

This work is now commonly referred to as the Psyché of Capua and dates
from the first century B.C. It is in the National Archeological Muséum
in Naples. This is another head cast from a full standing figure that
has a well-preserved surface.

Plate I, 45. The Capitoline Ariadne. (_Ariane du Capitole._)

See the comments to plate I, 41. An unusual view, we are looking over
the shoulder of the figure. In Step 1 an excellently placed plumb line
locates five basic points and sets the intersection of the horizontal
under the nose. Construct to the right and left on the horizontal. The
hair is carefully plotted. In Step 2 there is not much strong shadow but
considerable halftone modeling on the lower jaw and neck. A view of a
turned head with diminished or lost features is called a lost profile
(_profil perdu_). Avoid the tendency to turn it into a profile by paying
attention to the accurate placement of the features.

Plate I, 46. Young boy. (_Jeune garçon._)

This is another lost profile. The shadow accentuates the profile. This
presents an occasion to study the shape of the skull and a strongly
foreshortened ear.

Plate I, 47. Head of a horse. (_Tête de cheval._)

Although the plate inscription describes this Greek sculpture (448-33
B.C.) as coming from the west pediment (_fronton occidental_) of the
Parthenon in Athens, it is actually from the east pediment. The
lithograph by Bargue is after a drawing by Lecomte de Nouÿ. The original
Greek marble is in the British Museum in London. This cast is in a very
difficult position for a drawing. Step 1 is a demonstration of how to
break down the head of the horse into angles. Horizontal lines relate
features across the form. Be careful with the curved lines of the jaw.

Plate I, 48. Phocion. (_Phocion._)

Phocion was a Greek general and statesman of the early fourth century
B.C. This is a head cast from a full-length, standing statue in the
Vatican Museums in Vatican City. The top of his head is flat because the
Phrygian cap he wears has not been cast except for the rim. Step 1 is
without plumb line or horizontals. You may draw in some if you wish
since you have developed your own method by now. The schema shows the
breakdown into angles and straights. The shadow line is indicated in
most places. Reflected lights reveal forms in the shaded areas such
cases the values may vary quite a bit. Save these areas of reflected
light until last and bring them out of the shadow with an eraser. Be
careful not to exaggerate them. This is a lesson in complex lighting.

_Note_: To plot the curls in the beard, work from large groups to
smaller shapes and finally to details.

Heads in Frontal Views (_Têtes de face._)

Plate I, 49. Agrippa. (_Agrippa._)

This plate is after a cast of a famous Roman sculpture of the first
century B.C., now in the Louvre Museum in Paris. Marcus Vipinius Agrippa
(62-23 B.C.) was the chief administrator under the Roman emperor
Augustus. His foresight, reliability, and efficiency are conveyed by the
severity of the portrait. A man of about forty, he is lighted from a
direct overhead source that creates a symmetrical pattern of shadows
under the projecting forms. The finished drawing shows how the human
form can be simplified and still retain its integrity. Underneath it all
is the stolid Roman fondness for heavy forms.
In Step 1 the plumb line through the middle divides the face into two
halves. The horizontals are easily chosen through the corners of the
eyes, nose, and mouth. These guidelines plot the corners of the shadow
patterns as well. The shadows, in turn, describe the basic features of
the face with minimal use of halftones. In Step 2 the forms are
clarified by a few halftones around the nose, under the chin and mouth,
and on the cheeks.

Plate I, 50. Marcus Brutus. (_Marcus Brutus._)

See the commentary to plate I, 36 to learn about the statue and the
subject. Step 1 is not illustrated here since you know the step from the
previous plate of Agrippa. The shadow line is clear from head to neck,
the result of a controlled, single light source. In Step 2, or finishing
stage, note that the cast shadows (especially on the nose and chin)
transpose gradually to half lights, an effect to be carefully imitated
employing skills already nurtured. The darkest values are at the center
of the head.

Plate I, 51. Jupiter Trophonius. (_Jupiter Trophonius._)

Stylistically this is a complex piece. It is a depiction of the Roman
god Jupiter (Greek Zeus) in the early classical or severe style
prevalent in Greece around 500 B.C. A Greek or Roman sculptor from a
later era carved the piece. All the stylized features are arranged in
strict symmetrical patterns, but they are softened by more naturalistic
conventions. The strong idealism or classicism of the depiction
attracted Bargue and Gérôme. The title of Trophonius relates Jupiter to
an oracular Greek god whose ritual site was in Boetia, one of the
republics of ancient Greece.

Plate I, 52. Lucius Junius Brutus. (_Lucius Junius Brutus._)

This drawing is based on a cast ultimately derived from a fourth-century
B.C. bronze bust in the Capitoline Museum in Rome (see fig. 16). This
sculpture of an unidentified Roman has long been associated with Brutus,
a legendary hero of the sixth century B.C. famous for killing
Tarquinius, the tyrannical king of Rome (who had raped Brutus’s sister,
Lucretia). This opened the way for the founding of the Roman republic,
which lasted until Octavius declared himself Caesar Augustus, emperor of
the Roman Empire, in 27 B.C. Brutus’s regicide made him a hero during
the French Revolution. Casts of the bust, known as the Capitoline
Brutus, were in academies and ateliers throughout France and Europe
beginning in the early nineteenth century.
The direction of the light (as from a high window to one side) is
similar to that of the other Brutus (see plate I, 50). The light,
entering at a forty-five-degree angle, illuminates three-quarters of the
face, leaving one side in shadow; an ideal light for revealing form. In
Step 1, as in the other frontal portraits, the plumb line goes through
the center of the face. The horizontals pass through the brows, the base
of the nose, and the mouth. The shadow line is clear from head to
neck—one line—again the result of a single light source. In Step 2 be
careful with the transitions from shadow through halftones to light. The
shadows start out solid, and become gradually more diffuse as they
progress toward the light. There are few details of the hair in the
shadow pattern.

[Fig. 16.]

Plate I, 53. Young woman. Life cast. (_Jeune femme. Moulage sur nature._)

On life casts, see the commentary to plate I, 33 and note 17.
Step 1: Note that the central axis is not a plumb line; it is aligned
with the slight tilt of the head. The two horizontal guidelines that
frame the eyes are perpendicular to the axis line. These horizontals are
perpendicular to a central axis that is not perpendicular but is aligned
with the tip of the head. Another set goes through the nose and mouth.
The light is more than a three-quarter light.
Step 2 is highly modeled, with many halftones and smooth transitions
between shadows and halftones. Note that the nostrils depicted in the
first step are lost here; they were used there to aid in the
construction of the nose. The gradations from light to dark on the left
side of the face are darker than those on the right, showing both the
direction of the light and the pattern it makes across the face.

_Note_: It is a convention in posing women to use bright frontal
lighting, which produces rounded forms and minimizes shadows.

Plate I, 54. Homer. (_Homère._)

This beautiful bust (Greek, first century B.C.) is not an actual
portrait of the mythical Greek poet of the eighth century B.C., but
rather an idealized invention of the Hellenistic period. It was very
popular in antiquity; several marble versions have survived (for a good
example, see fig. 17). Because Homer was so revered in the nineteenth
century, casts of the bust were in most ateliers and sculpture
collections. It was used as the model for almost all nineteenth-century
paintings depicting the fabled poet, as exemplified by Ingres’s The
Apotheosis of Homer (_L’Apothéose d’Homère_) (1827) in the Louvre Museum
in Paris and Bouguereau’s Homer and His Guide (_Homère et son guide_)
(1874) in the Milwaukee Art Museum, Wisconsin. As the last in the series
of head studies, this is fully developed in exemplary fashion.
Step 1 shows the placement of the plumb line through the middle of the
face and the three horizontals through the features. The forms in the
schema are blocked out in an angular fashion, showing the location or
work space for the features rather than the actual forms.
Step 2 the fully modeled head is described with a limited range of
values. Begin modeling your drawing with only two or three values. As
the forms become more accurate, so will your description of subtle
values. Working this way can help you relate smaller value changes to
the larger patterns of light in the drawing.

[Fig. 17, Homer. (_Homère._) Marble. 41 cm. (16 in.) First century B.C.
Helen Lillie Pierce Fund, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.]

Torsos. (_Torses._)

Plate I, 55. The Belvedere Torso, rear view. (_Le torse du Belvédère, vu de dos._)

This statue (ca. 50 B.C.) is signed Apollonius son of Nestor, Athenian,
and is in the Museo Pio-Clementino, Vatican Museums, Vatican City.
Despite being devoid of arms, lower legs, feet, part of the chest, as
well as part of its buttocks (cut away to make it fit into a fountain
niche), this statue has been famous since its rediscovery in the early
1400s. Acquired by a pope after 1506, the statue was put on display in
the Belvedere courtyard of the Vatican (hence the name); now it is kept
inside the museum, just off the courtyard. A favorite of Michelangelo,
it was the inspiration for his superhuman male bodies. The torso is in a
traditional pose for the resting Hercules (and consequently of other
melancholic types like Saturn and Samson), but recently it has been
suggested that the subject is Ajax resting, depressed after his fit of
madness. Casts are fairly common, for the work is greatly admired down
to this day (see fig. 18 and plate I, 63).
Ancient practice seems to have had a different physical type for each of
the four humors, the basis of both ancient medicine and psychology:
Jupiter was the sanguine type, Mars the choleric type, Neptune the
phlegmatic type, and Hercules and Saturn the melancholic type. (The
sixteenth-century Milanese writer Cian Paolo Lomazzo added a
choleric-melancholic type to accommodate Apollo.) In the late
Renaissance this system of humors was sometimes used to aid in the
comprehension of a history painting, that is, the painter would
paint—and the reader could interpret the reactions of the participants
in a scene according to their recognizable physic ; types or
temperaments. You need not learn this system, but you should be aware of
the individual traits of these idealized types when you copy ancient
works and study them. (It might interest you to know that the popular
types of astrological personalities or temperaments–the signs–are
ultimately based on the four humors and their combinations.) Most of the
casts presented from now on are fully modeled and lack a suggested
schema. schemata that are provided (see plates I, 56, 58, 60) should be
studied first to get an idea of how to approach such complex figures.
The illumination of the Belvedere Torso from above emphasizes the
halftones across the muscles.
Step 1: Choose a plumb line, locate good points for the verticals, and
trace in diagonals that define the Bargue lines (the straight lines that
connect the major points and provide the first outline of the figure).
Delineate in straight lines the position of the spinal cord. These lines
will need to be refined in coordination with the development of the
outline.

[Fig. 18.]

Plate I, 56. Male torso, back view. (_Torse d’homme, vu de dos._)

This torso is the remnant of a full standing figure, probably an athlete
or political hero. Stylistically it is in the tradition of the
fifth-century B.C. Greek master Polykleitos, a sculptor who wrote a book
on the proportions of the human body. This book is known only by its
title and a few references to its contents in other ancient writings.
Polykleitos was the sculptor of the famous Doryphorus, or Spearbearer, a
lost bronze (ca. 450 B.C.) now known only through a small series of
Roman marble copies in various museums (the best is in the National
Archeological Museum in Naples). The Polykleitan male is elegantly
proportioned, with clearly outlined, tense muscle forms that are
simplified geometrically. This type became the ideal for the male body
in antiquity and again in modem times (see plates 1, 61 and I, 68).
Step 1: The plumb line follows the spine along the shadow edge down to
the lumbar, where it becomes independent in its descent but still passes
through some good angles. It is probably the most useful reference line
that you can find. The top horizontal is through the outside point of
the left deltoid and the inner angle of the right deltoid. There is no
horizontal for the bottom, but one should be supplied to remind you that
the front lines of the base are not precisely horizontal. Plot the
points for the other transversals carefully. Trace in the movement of
the _contrapposto_ through the center of the body, down the spinal cord,
while finding points for the transversals. The outline should be like
that in the schema: all straight lines, with every important angle
included. The shadow demarcation is very simple and is all done in
straight lines.
Step 2: Two values of halftones supplement the shadows. There is some
reflected light in large areas of the shadow. A very dark line has been
drawn in the division of the buttocks. Straight lines in the small of
the back invigorate the pose.

Plate I, 57. Female torso, three-quarter view. (_Torse de femme, vu de trois quarts._)

This unidentified torso is probably of a bathing Venus, similar to the
type developed by Praxiteles in the fourth century B.C. No schema is
given, so you are to develop it according to established practice. Try
to maintain the simplicity of the finish, with its marginal shadows,
restricted halftones, and large, clear areas.

Plate I, 58. Milo of Crotone, by Pierre Puget. (_Milon de Crotone, de Pierre Puget._)

This is the most renowned statue by Pierre Puget (1620-1694), the most
famous French sculpture during the reign of Louis XIV. It was sculpted
between 1672 and 1679. By choosing an ancient hero as the subject of his
sculpture, Puget meant to rival the sculptors of antiquity, and its
inclusion here means that the editors thought he had succeeded. This is
a partial cast of the complete work in the Louvre Museum in Paris (see
fig. 19). Milo of Crotone was a famous Greek athlete of the sixth
century B.C. While chopping firewood, his hand got caught in a log that
he was attempting to split with his bare hands; trapped he was helpless
when a pack of wolves emerged from the woods and attacked him. Despite
specifications of ancient texts—which Puget certainly knew—a lion has
been substituted for the wolves, perhaps to give Milo a less ignoble
death and to associate the athlete with Hercules.
Step 1: The schema is a beautiful drawing by itself, clear and dramatic.
It lacks a plumb line- instead, a central line follows the
_contrapposto_ of the body. Be careful as you establish the
foreshortening of the eyes; brow, _perforais_, and abdominal muscles.
Bargue continues to block in outsized shapes with long, straight lines
that sometimes cover up anatomical details. He has put in some shadows
in the head to help with the foreshortening of the nose–a good procedure
for difficult constructions.
Step 2: The lighting is frontal; as a result, most anatomical details
are described by faint halftones. The darkest tone is found just inside
the shadow edge between the halftone and the shadow. Note the meandering
nature of the darkest part; it follows the shadow edge and describes the
rise and fall of the musculature.

[Fig. 19.]

Plate I, 59. The Vatican Amazon, draped. (_Amazone du Vatican, drapée._)

The identification of this torso in the Vatican Museums, Vatican City,
as an Amazon is no longer accepted; the work is a variant of the
Hellenistic type sometimes described as a “Diana with Mantle Draped as a
Sash,” a type of statue extant in many ancient examples. For us it is a
splendid, well-preserved or well-restored model of ancient drapery. Work
with the drapery as you did earlier with hair: divide it into segments,
the folds into groups; let the longer lines describe the rhythmic fall
of the folds.

Plate I, 60. Male torso, three-quarter view. (_Torse d’homme, vu de trois quarts._)

This is the same Polykleitan torso as in plate I, 56, with the
illumination from the same direction. The dramatic difference between
the views demonstrates that any cast has multiple views for drawing
exercises. Note that the plumb line has changed. The verticals, although
similar, do not reinforce the anatomical structure as effectively as
they did in the first drawing, although the shift of the _contrapposto_
is well described. The rarefied beauty of the outline in Step 2
contrasts dramatically with the modeled shadows of the back, which, in
turn, contrast with the unified lights.

Plate I, 61. Theseus. (_Thésée._)

This is an original Greek work from the east pediment of the Parthenon
(447-432 B.C.), now in the British Museum in London. The figure is
sometimes identified as Dionysus. Both this and the next statue were
parts of greater compositions with a unifying story, tucked into a
triangular temple pediment high above the public that viewed it. This
great fragment sat on the shelf of the pediment down through the
millennia, somewhat protected from the weather by the projecting cornice
overhead.
The statue was dismounted and brought to London by Lord Elgin in 1803
where it immediately became a standard for the portrayal of the human
body and was traditionally accepted as by the hand of the fabled
sculptor Phidias, who actually was the superviser of the pedimental
sculpture. Bargue made his lithograph after a drawing by Lecomte du Nouÿ
(see note 58). He has ignored the roughness of the long-exposed surface,
while at the same time neglecting to restore the parts detached by war
and vandalism (see fig. 20). However, the stains on the marble were not
evident on the cast from which the plate was drawn.
This is a good mid-fifth-century body, clear in proportions and
geometrically simplified in its anatomical forms. The musculature is
emphasized, it is firm, not relaxed, although it is slightly more supple
than the Achilles of plate I, 68. This is the first reclining figure in
the course. You are presented with a finished cast drawing with overhead
lighting. The central line of the statue is based on a half circle: up
the right thigh, along the _linea alba_–the visible line through the
center of the torso that separates the body into symmetrical halves,
from the pit of the neck, between the _perforais_, through the center of
the abdomen and the navel, down to the groin—through abdomen and chest,
and up through the neck and head. Here you can see both the usefulness
as well as the beauty of Greek geometrical simplification.
Refined Greek taste is seen in the general idealization: the body
surfaces are simplified; the muscles are clear-edged and do not overlap.
These are characteristics of the good taste that Gérôme and Bargue have
been trying to teach you plate by plate. In schematizing the drawing,
erect verticals that divide the body into logical, workable sections.
Find one or more plumb lines; work out the schematic lines between
important points, and so forth.

[Fig. 20.]

Plate I, 62. Ilissos. (_L’Ilissus._)

The original Greek sculpture from the west pediment of the Parthenon in
Athens (447-32 B.C.) is in the British Museum in London. The time period
given for the pediments is between the making of the contracts for both
pediments and the last payment. The west pediment is usually considered
to have been started after the east pediment, by artists of the next
generation. Although still idealized, Ilissos is more naturalistic than
Theseus. The fifth century was a period of rapid stylistic development
in Greek sculpture.
As with the Theseus, the composition is based on a subtle circle. The
muscles are not all taut and firm, as in the Theseus, but relaxed,
moving away from the geometrical confines of the earlier sculpture and
covered by a pliable skin. Under the right knee, a tendon cuts across
two forms. (There are no tendons in the Theseus statue.) Your study of
the leg of plate I, 27 has prepared you for the left knee of Ilissos. To
build a schema, start with a plumb line through the head. Building a
triangle with the extremities as points (as in plate I, 5 of the foot)
might be helpful. Other vertical reference lines crossing through the
triangle might help you determine additional angles.

Plate I, 63. The Belvedere Torso, front view. (_Le torse du Belvédère, vu de face._)

This lithograph by Bargue is after a drawing by Lecomte du Nouÿ (see
note 58). Look at the schema for Puget’s Milo of Crotone (plate I, 58)
for guidance. Find the plumb line and the organizing verticals. Then
plot out the straight schematic lines. Check and recheck for accuracy:
you have many details to put inside the outline, so it must be accurate
for them all to fit intelligently. The light from above left emphasizes
the halftones of the muscles, and every bit of the surface is modeled.
This is a very elaborate drawing. In fact, all the drawings at the end
of the first part or the Drawing Course are very polished and highly
finished, so do not rush them.

Plate I, 64. Female torso, rear view. (_Torse de femme, vu de dos._)

This seated Venus is again of the Praxitilean type, with large hips and
thighs, geometric breasts like hemispheres, and areas of fat not yet
rejected by modern standards for feminine pulchritude. Look at the
schema for Male torso, rear view (plate I, 60) to aid you in copying
this drawing.

Complete Figures. (_Ensembles._)

Plate I, 65. Knight. (_Cavalier._)

Plate I, 66. Two knights. (_Deux cavaliers._)

These two reliefs come from the Parthenon frieze in Athens; both are _in
situ_ in the frieze on the west end. When finished, the frieze extended
some 160 meters (406 feet) around all four sides of the building; it was
placed high up, under the protecting roof of the porch. Great portions
of the frieze have survived: one fragment is in the Louvre Museum in
Paris; many sections are in the British Museum in London; other panels
are in the Acropolis Museum in Athens; and—miraculously—some 30 meters
are still in place on the building. Casts of the frieze exist in many
art schools and academies, most likely having survived the
twentieth-century neglect and destruction of casts because they hung out
of the way, high up on the wall, or perhaps—one would like to
think—because they were still admired. These are your first models of
complete figures. As reliefs, they allow you to concentrate on the
outlines and to study the subtle yet critical modeling. This is also a
lesson in drawing the complete Phidian horse, with a head even more
simplified than the horses’s head from the east pediment (see plates I,
37 and I, 47). Organize your drapery around the directional lines
describing movement in the drapery and the specific points where it
hangs and drops in simple folds.

Plate I, 67. Cincinnatus. (_Cincinnatus._)

The subject of the statue, now identified as Mercury Tying His Sandal
(Hermès rattachant sa sandale), is attributed to the School of Lysippus
(ca. 330 B.C.; see fig. 21); the depiction of the thinking process
through facial expression is thought to be an innovation of Lysippus,
the great Greek sculptor of the fourth century B.C. This statue, which
exists in two incomplete marble versions—the most famous of which is in
the Louvre Museum in Paris—was probably a bronze of the late fourth
century B.C. cast during the Hellenistic age, when sculptors were
experimenting with movement and its effects on bodily structure. The
statue was long interpreted by earlier scholars (who loved attaching
stories to statuary) as the proverbially patriotic Cincinnatus (a Roman
leader of the late sixth century B.C.) putting on his sandals after he
has been told that he has been elected counsel of Rome and prepares to
leave his farm for Rome to serve his country. It could just as easily he
Hermes (Mercury) preparing for a flight, although the sandals are not
winged (in any event, they are modern restorations), or it might be an
athlete looking up to acknowledge a call as he prepares to enter the
arena. The identification with Mercury is useful because the mercurial
type of body is muscular but not buffed, sinewy rather than massive, and
his frame is elongated and agile. Carefully note which muscles are tense
and which relaxed.

[Fig. 21. Cincinnatus (or Mercury Tying His Sandal). (_Cincinnaius ou
Hermès rattachant sa sandale._) Marble. 154 cm (60.5 in.) After a Greek
original from the school of Lysippus, fourth century B.C. Louvre Museum,
Paris.]

Plate I, 68. Achilles. (_Achille._)

Now referred to as the Ares Borghese (ca. 430 B.C.), the statue is in
the Louvre Museum in Paris (see fig. 22). In this perfect young male all
the parts of the body we have studied separately are harmoniously
integrated. Earlier archeologists dramatized the statue by seeing it in
the image of Achilles, the greatest of the warriors of Greek legend. It
is now identified as Ares (Mars), the god of war. This is a great
example of post-Phidian Greek sculpture, showing the attributes of style
assigned to Skopas and Polykleitos, still surviving on the Parthenon in
the figure of Theseus (plate I, 61). The presence of the palm tree-like
support is evidence that the marble was copied from a bronze (where one
could have simply strengthened the walls of the leg to make it strong
enough to stand). The original was probably carrying a bronze spear, an
artifact now lost and here indicated by a plug. The muscles are clear
and geometrically simplified in their boundaries (no overlappings), and
the distortions are minor. If you have already drawn a thigh from a
muscular model, you will recognize the accomplishment in the
simplification of the figure’s upper legs. A memorable trait seems to be
the groin line, intact from the lower edge of one lateral oblique to the
other. But note the grace added to this otherwise somewhat
dehumanized—if still erotic—body by an almost mysterious movement
through the body engendered by the curve of the _contrapposto_ stance.

[Fig. 22. Achilles (Ares Borghese). (_Achille ou Arès Borghèse._) ca.
430 B.C. Marble. 212 cm. (6 ft. 11. 25 in.) Louvre Museum, Paris.]

Plate I, 69. Germanicus. (_Germanicus._)

This statue is now identified as Marcellus, nephew of Augustus (ca. 20
B.C.). It is signed “Cleomenes, son of Cleomenes.” The original Roman
statue is now in the Louvre Museum in Paris. We have already studied the
left foot (plate I,10) and the right leg (plates I, 25 and I, 27). This
is a rear view of a perfect man in the Greek style of the late fifth
century B.C. The work is more supple in form and more complex in its
musculature than the Achilles of the previous plate. We are given only
the rear view to copy, although we have studied the right leg and the
left foot. Probably both Bargue and Gérôme thought that the
individualized portrait head was incongruous with the idealized body
(see fig. 11). The drapery support might indicate that the marble was
copied from a bronze (which would not have needed such a support), but
by the end of the first century B.C., when this work was sculpted, such
supports may have become a standard accessory to marble originals. The
small support between the figure’s right thumb and forefinger was
probably meant to guard against breakage (perhaps at one time it was
tinted black). This did not discourage earlier archeologists from seeing
it as a die and interpreting the statue as “Mercury Casting a Die,” a
common iconographie motif for the god.

Plate I, 70. Saint Martha. (_Sainte Marthe._)

This unlocated statue, in the Late Gothic French style, was carved
around 1500. Bargue made the plate after a study of the statue by
Hippolyte Flandrin (1809-1864), several of whose drawings are reproduced
in the second part of the Drawing Course. Around 1500 the medieval
Gothic style persisted in France, as it did in most of Europe. It is
hard for us to realize that in the first part of the fifteenth century
the Italian Renaissance was still a minority movement in a few cities of
Italy. French Late Gothic sculpture nevertheless had some of the
intellectual traits of the Italian style, including better anatomical
proportions (even under the drapery) and more naturalistic drapery; its
folds were designed according to the weight of the fabric and not moved
by a decoratively expressed spiritual power that obscured the body
underneath, as in earlier Gothic sculpture. This courtly Late Gothic
style, often called “détente style,” was the perfect model for the
French Neo-Gothic movement of the early 1800s.
Flandrin made this study of the statue for his celebrated frieze in the
Neoclassical church of Saint-Vincent-de-Paul in Paris. He worked on the
commission between 1848 and 1853. Saint Martha, clearly labeled, stands
to the left side of the choir, the thirteenth figure from the altar. Her
costume and attributes are the same; her gesture, however, is changed
and the fall of her drapery has been simplified.Saint Martha appears in
the Gospel of Luke (10:38-41); she is a diligent housekeeper in contrast
to her more intellectual sister Mary. The two come to represent the
active and the contemplative lives. In Jacopo da Voragine’s Golden
Legend, a compendium of saints’ lives from the twelfth century, Saint
Martha accompanies her brother, Saint Lazarus, on a mission to France.
There she kills a dragon in Tarascon with holy water. Here she holds the
handle of a broken* aspergillum_, an instrument for spreading holy
water, and a vessel for the liquid—or perhaps it is just a water bucket
symbolizing her domestic activities.
Saint Martha is entered into the course as a drapery model, perhaps to
counter the seemingly realistic but highly agitated and stylized drapery
of the Diana (The Vatican Amazon of plate I, 59.) Compared to the
drapery of the Diana, this sober drapery obscures body parts, with
gravity controlling its decorative role. Be aware of how the
_contrapposto* affects the posture of the shoulders, hips, and legs;
look for the points from which the drapery hangs. The right shoulder
forms just such a hanging point for drapery, which falls over the
transverse sash down to the foot of the play leg. The high breasts are
also hanging points. Because there is so much detail to organize, the
shadows must be mapped out carefully; otherwise the details will not fit
in correctly.



PART II: COPYING MASTER DRAWINGS (_MODÈLES D’APRÈS LES MAÎTRES_)


Introduction

The drawings in part II were selected both for their aesthetic value- as
lessons in good taste—and for their demonstration of specific techniques
that can be learned in practice. Even though copying works by other
artists might appear contrary to the modem stress on originality,
centuries of the practice have proven it to be a good learning
experience.

Under the guild system that existed prior to the French Revolution,
apprentices regularly copied drawings, studies, and _iconographie_
models, as well as travel notations, from the portfolios of their
masters. They thus absorbed the style of their masters while at the same
time forming a personal repertoire of useful subjects and poses. The
results are apparent in the similarity of style and continuity of
iconography passed from, say, Robert Campin to his student Rogier van
der Weyden, from Perugino to Raphael, or, for that matter, from Gérôme
to Bargue.

For the master in charge of a workshop, the apprentice system had a
beneficial result: his students, having absorbed his personal style
through copying, could assist on all of his projects without noticeable
differences in execution. During their Wanderjahre—a two-year period of
wandering between taking their master’s examination and being able to
set up an independent studio—young artists sketched compositions and
figures from public or easily accessible monuments, as well as from the
portfolios of the masters under whom they served temporarily as
assistants.

Bargue did not make all his lithographs directly from the original
drawings. He made most of his plates from copies drawn by artists who
were chosen by Gérôme from among his colleagues and students. The
copyists either visited the collections where the drawings were
conserved or they worked after photographs. The Holbeins, for example,
are mostly kept in Basel and London, so it is unlikely that many of the
lithographs were made after the originals. Probably only the lithographs
after contemporary French masters were copied from originals; this would
have been an easy matter for Gérôme and Bargue to arrange either from
among the circle of Gérôme’s artist friends and students or from the
artists of Goupil’s coterie of painters.

Consequently, it is difficult to look at the set of plates as an example
of nineteenth-century taste without some qualifications. This is a
selection with didactic purposes chosen by Academic Realists.
Nonacademic and optical Realists (such as the Impressionists) might have
made a different selection. It is also strange that one drawing (plate
II, 6) attributed to Agnolo Gaddi, a trecento or Gothic master, is
included. It has since then been reattributed to a quattrocento master.
This drawing was probably chosen like the inclusion of Hippolyte
Fiandrin’s neo-gothic drawing of Saint Martha in the first part (plate
I, 70)—as a sop to the new fashion for the _primitifs_, as the Gothic
masters were then called. Some critics think that Hans Holbein the
Younger—whose work are amply represented in the second part—was popular
with the Realists for his “primitive” or “naive” qualities.

More surprising is the fact that the academician Jean-Auguste-Dominique
Ingres, one of the greatest of all draftsmen, and an older contemporary
of Bargue and Gérôme, is represented by only one figure (plate II, 33)
drawn after a highly finished (and famous) oil study for a painting.
(The author of the Goupil brochure announcing the Drawing Course
described the drawings after painted figures included among the plates
of drawings in part II as “interprétations of achieved works.”)

As a draftsman Ingres had developed a wondrously extravagant personal
style. He had a fondness for fluid, curvaceous outlines and was cavalier
in his disregard of anatomy—traits that could have displeased Gérôme. It
is easier to understand the exclusion of Delacroix and Rembrandt,
despite the fact that they were both draftsmen greatly beloved and
admired in the late nineteenth century. Delacroix would have been left
out because his loose, expressive but not always accurate or descriptive
line was alien to the academic style. Rembrandt’s chiaroscuro was
imitated by Bargue (see painting no. 33). His inimitable drawing style,
however, was too advanced for young artists to imitate and was probably
thought to be beyond the Academic Realists’ goal of precision. Rembrandt
was nonetheless the favorite painter of Gérôme, who thought the old
master’s sincerity compensated for his loose and often “incorrect”
drawing. All in all, the sixty-seven plates comprising part II must be
considered a didactic collection supporting late nineteenth-century
academic principles, with a few plates included under pressure from
Goupil, who either wanted to exploit plates already made or to include
some that would have a good sales potential in and of themselves.

It is not surprising that Bargue was more at home copying the works of
his contemporaries, especially the works of modern masters of his own
school: Gérôme; the students of Gérôme; Gérôme’s teachers Charles Gleyre
(1808-1874) and Paul Delaroche (1797-1856); and other academics and
Academic Realists who worked for Goupil. The authenticity of these
works, as well as their sympathy with the principles of the Drawing
Course, make them the most edifying of the drawings. A selection of
those drawings possessing the highest quality appear as full-page
illustrations, with expanded notes to aid those students wishing to copy
master drawings.


Realism, Idealism, and Academic Drawing

It is popularly thought that a major trait of Realism is the minute
recording of surface detail. This may be true of some artists and some
schools (such as those influenced by John Ruskin in England and the
United States). Such a practice, however, can often become a compulsive,
automatic, and even brainless activity. The description of minute
details is not, in fact, a trait of every Realist style. The practice of
Academic Realist drawing is selective in its creation of the illusion of
reality. The academic draftsman simplifies and even omits surface detail
in order to amplify the effects of light and shadow, the illusion of
volume, and the character of the subject. Furthermore, many drawings
have specific purposes: preparatory drawings, studies, idea sketches,
compositional sketches, and so forth. In fact, very few drawings are
ends in themselves; they may be intended as preparation for a painting
or a sculpture and might contain a notation of light effects, a study of
anatomy, of balance, the movement of drapery, or the fleeting expression
of a face. In drawing, you will be continually balancing the details of
nature against your specific purpose. To put it more abstractly, visual
facts in themselves are of interest, but they only have meaning when
intelligently organized, criticized, and judged.

Developed details are not, then, a necessary feature of all styles of
Realism, just as forms and shapes are not always experienced visually as
comprehensible wholes in the natural world. We all know how often a
trompe l’oeil effect fools us in our daily lives. The popular works of
the French Impressionists are good demonstrations of the optical Realism
concurrent with the tactile values of Academic Realism. In optical or
impressionistic painting, human figures often have outlines obscured by
other objects or shadows. Furthermore, organic unity and structure are
hidden by clothes, obfuscated by shade, and distorted by direct
sunlight. Optical Realists will often pursue the distortion of forms by
light and shadow; seldom will they try to correct them.

Academic Realists will organize these optical distortions within a
clarified, logical structure, recognizing them while minimizing their
disintegrating effect. A norm of clarity and ot unity is sought.
Consequently, a clear outline is required, as is a good balance of light
and dark areas to produce volume and three-dimensional shape. Poses are
carefully chosen so that all parts of the body are seen and understood.
There is an avoidance of distortion and ugliness. First and foremost,
there is the presentation of a unit, recognizable as a body, a person,
an organic unity without distracting details. These are major features,
even principles, of the basic academic style. The drawing style taught
in the Drawing Course is a compromise between the intellectual,
generalizing qualities of Idealism and the visual accuracy and
specificity of Realism. This compromise avoids both the tendency toward
oversimplification of line and form common in idealistic practice and
the uncertain and distorted forms recorded by optical Realists, as well
as the depiction of ugliness accepted by doctrinaire Realists. Academic
Realists treat the human body with respect and honor its integrity; they
give the human body a sense of dignity and autonomy. Their figures think
for themselves, and their motions are the result of self-conscious
thought. Academic Realism is essentially a humanistic style, based
primarily on an interest in human beings, their actions, their
reactions, and their fate.

The drawings in the second part of the Drawing Course were selected as
didactic models primarily for their developed sense of unity,
simplicity, and effectiveness. There are, of course, other didactic
purposes underlying the selections. Like the models of casts, the model
drawings were also selected for their variety of techniques and views.
Furthermore, Gérôme and Bargue are giving you models of good, selective
taste (“le grand goût“), a taste formed by studying specific examples of
ancient and High Renaissance art. Good classical taste is basically a
matter of combining beautiful features selected from nature with an
ideal of human perfection. Underlying this taste is both an ideal of
simplification geared toward clear geometrical shapes in planes and
outlines and an abhorrence of distortion.

Copying these drawings should give you intimate contact with an
absorbed, digested, and projected classical taste, as well as with a
variety of personal styles and idiosyncratic ways of seeing. absorbing,
organizing, and recording visual information. The academic concerns do
not hinder squelch, or make impossible a personal style, as the drawings
in this part demonstrate.

Look carefully at the following three portraits: lithographs based on
works by Filippino Lippi (1457-1504) (plate II, 12), Gleyre (plate II,
13), and Gérôme (plate II, 14). These drawings demonstrate both the
consistency of academic conventions and the variety of expression and
personal styles possible within them. Each is clear in outline, simple
in procedure, and restrained in details; in all three the illusion of
three-dimensional form is achieved with these simple means. Filippino’s
young man looks at us with an expression of intense thought, underscored
by deep shadow covering one side of his face. Gleyre’s Omphale is
clearly meant to be beautiful; her face is round, with delicate, varied
changes of value. Gérôme-who was one of Gleyre’s students- was a master
of solid, firm form; his bodies are neither mysterious nor delicate but
rather forthright present. With little or no unobtrusive detail, his
young Arab is presented as solidly present, self-contained, and
handsome. The solidity of form is maintained through the clarity of the
outline and the incredible simplicity of the shading. The shadows are
minimal, consisting of areas slightly darkened by lines. Although there
is careful description in the turban, the outline of the face, and the
ear, these details are not ends in themselves; the structural unity of
the head still dominates the drawing.

After practicing this short exercise in the comparison of drawing
styles, we must congratulate Bargue in getting the different character
or personal style of each of these drawings into the lithograph. Our awe
increases when we look at one more drawing (plate II, 23) entitled A
Roman Woman (Femme romaine) after a drawing of Adolphe-William
Bouguereau (1825-1905). It is a wonder, displaying a marvelous balance
between the observation of a realist and the ideals of a classicist.
Bouguereau is more concerned with anatomy than some of the other
masters. The bony appearance of her nose, the sunken eyes and cheeks,
and the thickness of her neck are qualities he describes so accurately
that it places the woman in her late forties, at not quite overripe
maturity. The outline is elegantly, sensitively drawn by means of a line
that continually changes its thickness or emphasis as it gives
sensitivity to the nose and lips, strength to the chin, and fullness to
the neck. The hair is complex without being detailed. In this drawing
Bouguereau is an absolute master of the Academic Realist drawing
technique, a mixture of observation, knowledge, and ideals.


Practical Matters

On Choosing a Master Drawing to Copy: The Benefits of Copying

When you choose a model to copy, there is something about the drawing
that attracts you. What is it? What entices you? Why do you think it
matches your level of ability? Once you choose a drawing as a model, you
are going to have a long, intense period of intimacy with a realized,
perhaps great, work. You will more or less memorize it in the
concentration of copying, as well as learning the techniques or
solutions the artist employed. This experience will mean more to you
after you have been drawing from nature for a while and consciously or
subconsciously recognize some of the problems of drawing from nature.

You might have chosen the drawing for the image, in which case you can
copy it in any medium that seems appropriate. Or you may want to copy it
for the techniques used, in which case you should use the same materials
as the artist did. At first you might be concerned with the shape or
outer contours. You might want to copy a drawing for solutions to
problems that you have already experienced—for instance, the transitions
at the edges of shadows or the overlapping lines of the outline that
enter a form to become anatomical features. Gradually you should choose
more challenging drawings.

Some passages may not make sense at all until you succeed in copying
them exactly and they take shape on your paper. Some distinctions will
only become visible as you copy, such as the variety of shades and
forms, of light and shadow. The techniques or the solutions may be
absorbed without your consciously knowing it through the intensity of
the experience of careful copying. That does not mean you should copy
slavishly and brainlessly; always keep your mind engaged in the act of
transcribing.

What you and the artist are trying to do is produce an illusion, a
convincing imitation of nature. These drawings all teach the
effectiveness of simplicity and economy—how even a few elements are
enough to create the illusion of three-dimensional shape on a flat
surface. This is an achievement even in a copy. Finally you will witness
a mystery: a series of lines abstracted from nature and recorded
carefully suddenly assume shape, depth, and character—with an aura of
beauty.

Getting Down to Copying

Putting your drawing board on an easel, with your model and a piece of
drawing paper alongside each other is a good way to copy. Attach the
papers with white tape you can get at an art-supply house (masking tape
will leave a sticky, dirty residue and may be hard to remove). Make sure
the easel is upright (check with your plumb line); this will give you a
view of the model without perspectival distortions. You can judge the
shape and seek out the salient outline points and transfer them to the
paper in several ways. You can proceed as you did for your cast
drawings, using your held-out plumb line to create vertical reference
lines and to estimate distances. As part of this process you are
simultaneously learning how to use tools to ascertain measurements and
how to use your eye to estimate them. Eventually it is the eye that has
to do the judging, so use your eye from the beginning; it will gradually
take over more and more of the measuring and estimating from your tools.
However, the tools—very useful at the beginning—will remain useful in
laying out the shape of objects, checking your measurements, finding
concordances of distances, and solving technical problems. No matter how
good your eye is, do not abandon the measuring tools; knowing how to use
them is part of your craft as an artist.

Since working with shadows will mean getting values right in your copy,
it would help to draw a scale of appropriate values at the bottom of
your drawing, from the lightest to the darkest, to use as a guide. As
you did with the cast drawings, develop the outlines of the larger forms
first; put in the linear shapes and refine them; work on the shadows
next, starting with the largest, darkest shadow; leave the halftones
till last. Remember, you want the outlines of the forms and shadows to
be exact before you fill in the details. Some areas you may not
understand until you get them down correctly; so study the special and
subtle effects before you attempt them. How does the master handle the
edges? How does he use his materials? Are the shadows hatched, stumped,
or veiled? Does he vary the strength of his line? Is the type classical,
idealized, realistic, general? Is something happening in the picture?
What? Can you capture the same projection of thought and movement in
your transcription? Copying a drawing should be an act of concentration,
just like working from a live model. There is a tendency when copying to
flatten out shapes. The artist was probably working from a
three-dimensional form; you, as a copyist, are working from a flat
image, and this fact usually reveals itself in the copy. Carefully study
how the artist achieved a sense of form and space in his drawing.


Notes on the Plates (II)

_Although all the lithographs in part II are reproduced, not all are
recommended for copying. THOSE THOUGHT TO BE THE BEST MODELS FOR
BEGINNING STUDENTS ARE REPRODUCED AS FULL-PAGE ILLUSTRATIONS and are
accompanied by technical notes. The others are reproduced as
quarter-page illustrations.
The plates 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 22, 23, 25, 31, 34, 35, 52, 54
and 67 are most suitable for copying._

Plate II, 1. Michelangelo (1475-1564), _Angel Blowing a Trumpet._ (_Ange sonnant de la trompette._) Sistine Chapel, Vatican City

This drawing is an “interprétation” of a famous figure in the grand
fresco The Last Judgment (1536-1542) in the Sistine Chapel in the
Vatican.

Plate II, 2. Hippolyte Flandrin (1809-1864), _Study of a Woman._ (_Étude de femme._) Whereabouts unknown

Flandrin, a student of Ingres, was most famous for his decorations of
churches and palaces. This is a preparatory drawing for the decorations
done in 1841 for the duc de Luynes at his chateau in Dampierre. See also
plates II, 15 and II, 25.

Plate II, 3. Hippolyte Flandrin, _Italian Shepherd_, study. (_Pâtre italien_ [tête d’étude].) Whereabouts unknown

Plate II, 4. Jean-Léon Gérôme (1824-1904), _Head of a Fellah_, three-quarter view. (_Tête de fellah, vue de trois quarts._) Private collection

See the comments to plate II, 14.

Plate II, 5. Andrea del Sarto (1486-1530), _Head of a Child._ (_Tête d’enfant._) Louvre Museum, Paris

This is a drawing for a figure in the painting Caritas, painted in Paris
in 1518. The painting is also in the Louvre Museum in Paris. See also
comments to plate I, 31.

Plate II, 6. Agnolo Gaddi (1345-1396), _Portrait of a Man._ (_Portrait d’homme._) British Museum, London

The drawing has the attribution to Agnolo Gaddi inscribed on the verso.
It was attributed to Masaccio by Johann David Passavant (1833) and to
Domenico Chirlandaio by Bernard Berenson (1938), an attribution retained
to this day.

Plate II, 7. Léon Bonnat (1833-1922), _Young Roman_, study. (_Jeune Romain_ [tête d’étude].) Bonnat Museum, Bayonne

Bonnat was a good friend of Gérôme and accompanied him on excursions (on
safari) in Egypt and Palestine on several occasions. A portrait painter
noted for the illusionistic qualities of his realism, Bonnat was also a
famous collector of master drawings; his collection is now in the Bonnat
Museum in Bayonne.
Vigorous cross-hatching establishes the hair, showing both its growth
pattern and its general planes. The roundness of the globe of the eye is
described by careful construction of its darkest parts as well as by the
placing of a few accents that follow the form. The subtle structure of
the children’s heads taxes any artist’s knowledge of anatomy because the
surface does not reveal the body structure.

Plate II, 8. Hans Holbein the Younger (1497-1543), _Gentleman from the Court of Henry VIII_. (_Gentilhomme de la cour de Henri VIII._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

Hans Holbein the Younger was born in Augsburg, where he was trained by
his father, Hans Holbein the Elder, a noted artist. He worked first in
Prague and Basel. After traveling in Italy and France, he went to
London, where he became court painter to Henry VIII. He sketched and
painted many members of the court in a frank and objective style. His
drawings are the most frequently reproduced in part II.

Plate II, 9. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Sir Nicholas Carew_. (_Sir Nicolas Carew._) Offentliche Kunstsammlung Basel, Kupferstichkabinett

Sir Nicolas was an _écuyer_, or squire, in charge of the stables of
Henry VIII.

[Fig. 23] 

Plate II, 10. Hans Holbein the Younger, _The Daughter of Jacques Meyer_. (_La fille de Jacques Meyer._) 1525. Otientliche Kunstsammlung Basel, Kupferstichkabinett

This drawing of Anna Meyer is a preparatory drawing for a portrait in
the Gemildegalerie Alte Meister, Staatliche Kunstsammlungen, Dresden.
If you look ahead to the portraits by Paul Dubois (plate I, 18) and
Adolphe-William Bouguereau (plate I, 23), you will see that Holbein has
more carefully delineated each element—including facial features and
costume— than either artist. Yet both Dubois and Bouguereau have
outlined the contours of the face with great subtlety, noting the
sitter’s anatomy: the forehead, the brow, the cheekbone, the nose, the
fullness of the cheek and of the muscles around the mouth, and the
protuberance of the chin. Study each drawing. Try to understand the
reason for each bump or depression of the face; refer to an anatomy book
for guidance. The light is frontal but diffused. Lighter areas are
modeled by veiling. Compare this drawing with the photograph of the
original drawing, done in black and colored chalks against a green
background (see fig, 23).

Plate II, II. Raphael (_1483-1520_), Kneeling Woman. (_Figure de femme agenouillée._) Pinacoteca Vaticana, Vatican City

The drawing is after a figure in Raphael’s oil painting, The
Transfiguration (painted between 1517 and 1520), in the Pinacoteca
Vaticana, Vatican City.

Plate II, 12. Filippino Lippi (1457-1504), _Portrait_. (_Portrait de Filippino Lippi._) Ufizzi Gallery, Florence

This is an “interprétation,” that is, a drawing after a finished work,
in this case a self-portrait in fresco (probably a fragment of a wall
decoration). Fresco technique requires broad handling. Whereas Bonnat
(see plate II, 7) had used hatching for shading, here the artist uses a
_sfumato_—a gentle modeling by means of an overlapping, blended
succession of values—in a dramatic _chiaroscuro_. The light on the right
side reveals the fleshy roundness of the artist’s parted lips. The
direction of the illumination—frontal lighting slightly off to one
side—causes a raking shadow and sets the mood of the portrait. A
slightly agitated youth emerges from the shadowed uncertainty of
adolescence.

Plate II, 13. Charles Gleyre (1808-1874), _Omphale_, study. (_Omphale_ [tête d’étude].) Whereabouts unknown

Cleyre was one of Gérôme’s teachers. This is a study “from nature” for
the painting Hercules at the Feet of Omphale (_Hercule aux pieds
d’Omphale_), now in the Musée Cantonal des Beaux-Arts, Lausanne. William
Hauptman thinks the drawing was done by Gleyre expressly for the Drawing
Course; he also notes that Diego Rivera (1886-1957) copied this
lithograph while a student in Madrid. Cleyre’s interpretation of the
Greek portrait style is modified by his working from life. The frontal
lighting pushes most of the darker tints to the edges, emphasizing the
outline. The expression is tender yet ambiguous, as is the modeling,
which describes Omphale’s features in a thin veil of tone.

Plate II, 14. Jean-Léon Gérôme (1824-1904), _Head of a Fellah_, profile. (_Tête de fellah, vue de profil._) Private collection

A fellah is an Egyptian peasant. This sketch was made while traveling on
safari in Egypt during the winter of 1856-57; the young man was probably
a retainer. Gérôme also engraved the portrait.
Gérôme uses a device that successfully focuses our interest on the face:
he finishes the features, while handling the clothing in a sketchier
style. His cross-hatching is very vigorous. Gérôme was obviously
attracted to the pronounced, punctuated features of the young Arab.
Compare the handling of this head with Gleyre’s treatment of a young
girl’s head in plate I, 36.

Plate II, 15. Hippolyte Flandrin, _Study of a Woman_. (_Étude de femme._) Whereabouts unknown

This is a preparatory drawing for the decorations done in 1841 for the
duc de Luynes at his chateau in Dampierre. See also comments to plates
I, 2 and II, 25.
Flandrin has reserved the most pronounced modeling for the contours, an
effect produced more naturally by Cleyre (see plate II, 13). These are
not actual shadows but rather a darkening of light areas with
crosshatchings, the effect of frontal lighting. Like Gérôme, Flandrin
has described the drapery sketchily, although not enough to disturb the
classical, intellectual imitation of Greek vase painting behind the pose
of the woman and her chair. Compare the idealized portrait of the woman
with the cast drawing of a Roman empress (plate I, 43), the depiction of
her body to Raphael’s clothed figure (plates II, II and II, 43), and the
modeling of the outstretched hand to that of the cast drawing of a woman
pressing her breast with her hand (plate I, 15).

Plate II, 16. Raphael, _Self-Portrait_. (_Portrait de Raphael._) Uffizi Gallery, Florence

This drawing is an “interprétation” after an early painting by Raphael
also in the Uffizi.

Plate II, 17. Jean-Jacques Henner (1829-1905), _Laughing Boy_, study. (_Le Rieur_ [tête d’étude].) Whereabouts unknown

Henner was famous for nudes painted in a developed chiaroscuro. His
house in Paris is now the Musée national Jean-Jacques Henner.
Strongly animated heads are in the tradition both of Hellenistic
sculpture and of the sculpted _têtes d’expression_, or expressive heads
(that is, heads showing specific emotions) produced by students at the
Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris (see also _concours_ in glossary). Henner
combines all three methods of shading—stumping, hatching, and veiling—in
this lively head. Seen from above, the hair becomes the dominant
feature. The view was chosen to add movement to the figure and to
support the expression on the boy’s face. The hair is decorative yet
still true to the values one might see in nature. The part breaks the
hair up into sections that follow the growth pattern,

Plate II, 18. Paul Dubois (1829-1905), _Roman Woman_. (_Femme romaine._) Whereabouts unknown

Dubois was an excellent sculptor whose work was influenced by Florentine
quattrocento sculpture. He was a student at the École des Beaux-Arts in
Paris, where even sculptors were taught to draw well.
By deliberately putting his model in profile, Dubois emphasizes the
abstract and formal qualities of the picture rather than the personality
of the sitter. Her features are described in halftones that contrast
with the light background and further distinguish the contours. Both
stumping and veiling techniques could have achieved the painterly
qualities of this drawing. Whereas Gérôme suppressed most of the values
of the face in his portraits of Arabs, Dubois describes every change in
values—and he finishes the clothing and accessories as well.

Plate II, 19. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Sir Charles Elliot_. (_Le chevalier Charles Elliot._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

Plate II, 20. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Gentleman from the Court of Henry VIII_. (_Gentilhomme de la cour de Henri VIII._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

Plate II, 21. Michelangelo, _Study of a Man_. (_Étude d’homme._) Sistine Chapel, Vatican City

This is another “interprétation” after a figure in the Last Judgment
fresco (1536-1542) in the Sistine Chapel. It is a lesson in
foreshortening.

Plate II, 22. Auguste Toulmouche (1829-1890), _Young Woman Kissing Her Child_. (_Jeune femme embrassant son enfant._) Whereabouts unknown

Like Gérôme, Toulmouche was a student of Gleyre. He and Gérôme also
belonged to the Néo-Grecs, a group of young painters of the
mid-nineteenth century who painted genre scenes set in antiquity.
Toulmouche soon switched to contemporary genre scenes, depicting
middle-class women and their children. This pair was also used in a lost
painting entitled The Maternal Kiss (_Le Baiser maternel_), which was
shown at the Salon of 1857.
The lighting is frontal. Both interlocked figures are seen in profile.
Toulmouche uses subtle changes in perspective to create rhythms that
move forward as well as up and down.

Plate II, 23. Adolphe-William Bouguereau (1825-1905), _A Roman Woman_, study. (_Tête de femme romaine_ [étude].) Whereabouts unknown

Bouguereau was almost an exact contemporary of Gérôme. Along with Ernest
Meissonier (1815-1891), they were the most famous representatives of
French Academic Realism of the second half of the nineteenth century.
Bouguereau’s use of loose hatch lines is closer to Gérôme’s methods than
to the hatching of Dubois. He probably drew this in pencil—the shadows
of the hair and figure are rather light—reserving the darks for the
accents in the eye, nose, mouth, and ear.

Plate II, 24, _Archer from Aegina_. (_Sagittaire Éginète._) Staatliche Antikensammlungen und Glyptothek, Munich

This is a figure (480 B.C.) from the east pediment of the Doric temple
of Aphia on the island of Aegina. The lion-head cap identifies him as
Hercules. In the early nineteenth century the twelve figures of the
pediment were restored by the great Danish Neoclassical sculptor Bertl
Thorvaldsen (1770-1884). The draftsman has chosen a view of the statue
where the restorations are least evident, which includes the right
forearm, the left hand, the left thigh, part of the right foot, and
parts of the hem of the skirt (see also plate I, 40).

Plate II, 25. Hippolyte Flandrin, _Study of a Woman_. (_Étude de femme._) Whereabouts unknown

This is yet another drawing for the decoration of the chateau of the duc
de Luynes in Dampierre; see comments to plates II, 2 and I, 15. This
drawing shows a woman drying her hair after a bath. The most remarkable
feature is the continuous, unbroken line describing the left contour of
the figure. Even though the character of the figure is round and
voluptuous, the outline is stabilized by straight passages. Moreover,
its linear, decorative quality vies with its ability to express volume.
As with the other nude studies prepared for the Dampierre decorations,
there is very little interior modeling. Dark accents are prominent only
in the features of the face. With a little practice the student will be
able to see how the drawing differs from nature, how Flandrin abstracts
and flattens the figure to achieve his conception of the ideal, and
which aspects of the figure he chooses to stress—such as the facial
expression—and which he chooses to suppress. The simplicity of the
drawing is deceptive. Flandrin’s style is practiced yet truthful in its
larger concepts: the muscles and morphological forms fit together, and a
minimum of tones reveals these forms. The lighting is similar to the
drawing of the cast of the Achilles (see plate I, 68).

Plate II, 26. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Citizen of Basel_. (_Bourgeoise de Bale._) Offentliche Kunstsammlung Basel, Kupferstichkabinett

Plate II, 27. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Anna Grisacria_. (_Anna Grisacria [Cresacre]._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

Plate II, 28. Hans Holbein the Younger, _John Poines_. (_John Poines._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

Plate II, 29. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Thomas, Count of Surrey_. (_Thomas, comte de Surrey._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

The sitter is now identified as Henry Howard, earl of Surrey.

Plate II, 30. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Anne Boleyn_. (_Anne Boleyn._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

Plate II, 31. Andrea del Sarto (1486-1530), _Self-Portrait_. (_Portrait d’Andrea del Sarto._) Whereabouts unknown

This is an “interprétation,” a drawing after a finished painting,
Charity, (1486) in the Uffizi Gallery, Florence. Andrea del Sarto was
one of the great masters of the Italian Renaissance, whose major works
are in the Pitti Palace in Florence.
Andrea’s treatment is more realistic than that of Gleyre and Flandrin.
He attends to all the major forms of the face, putting them in tonally
by means of stumping. The eyes are circumscribed by halftones that give
clarity to the skeletal sockets. Compare this with plate II, 12.

Plate II, 32. Raphael, _Dante_. (_Portrait du Dante._) Stanze di Raffaello, Vatican City

This is a drawing after the figure of Dante in the fresco Parnassus
located in the Stanza della Segnatura (1508-11) in the Vatican. Raphael
developed his likeness from older, traditional portraits of Dante.

Plate II, 33. Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres (1780-1867), _A Lictor_. (_Licteur._) Ingres Museum, Montauban

This is an “interprétation” after a famous oil sketch in the Ingres
Museum in Montauban. The oil sketch was a study for a large painting
entitled The Martyrdom of Saint Symphorian (_Le Martyre de saint
Symphorien_) (1834) in the Cathedral of Saint Lazare, Autun.

Plate II, 34. Jules Lefebvre (1836-1912), _Head of a Child_. (_Tête d’enfant._) Whereabouts unknown

Lefebvre was a successful academic painter, famous for his nudes, and a
longtime teacher at the Académie Julian in Paris. Although he received
many decorations, honors, and state commissions, he is hardly remembered
today, although several of his works are still admired and reproduced.
This is a preparatory drawing for his painting Cornelia, Mother of the
Gracchi (_Comélie, mére des Gracques_), whose present location is
unknown. This is a masterful study of a foreshortened head, seen from
below, as well as an example of “stopped modeling.” The halftones are
produced both by stumping and hatching. Thick and thin lines form the
contours, which are darkest on the shaded side of the head. The neck is
a cylinder that meets the shadowy underside of the chin. The mastoid
muscle (_sternocleidomastoideus_) is fully described under the ear, as
is its attachment to the clavicle below the lightly hatched Adam’s
apple.

Plate II, 35. Emile Lévy (1826-1890), _Head of a Young Italian Girl_. (_Tête de jeune fille italienne._) Whereabouts unknown ’

Emile Lévy was a student of François-Édouard Picot (1786-1868) and
Alexandre Denis Abel Pujol (1787~ 1861). Winner of a Prix de Rome in
history painting in 1854, he had a long career as a history and genre
painter. Since his death he has slipped into obscurity. Although a
contemporary of Gérôme and Bouguereau, he adhered to the conventions of
Neoclassicism and avoided the more strident traits of Realism.
To copy this, use red or sanguine conté or chalk. It might be helpful to
look again at the classical profiles in plates I, 33 and I, 40. The
design of the hair is especially fine in its controlled ornamentation.
The contour is stressed, as in many of the drawings. The lips are parted
but still planar. Although each feature of the profile is carefully
articulated, there is less detail in the interior modeling, with its
_sfumato_, diffused shadows, and nebulous halftones.

Plate II, 36. Charles Gleyre, _Head of a Young Italian Girl_. (_Tête de jeune fille italienne._) Whereabouts unknown

On Gleyre, see comments to plate I, 13. William Hauptman has identified
the subject as either a study for or after the figure in the painting
_La Charmeuse_ of 1878, in the Kunstmuseum Basel. He postulates that the
drawing might have been commissioned by Goupil for the Drawing Course.
Use red or sanguine chalk. This is another unusual and instructive view
complicated by the plumpness—more fat than muscle—of the child. Axial
and vertical hatching describe the top and lower planes of the
simplified hair. The prominent ear is fully finished, as are the values
of the face. Note that the ear does not distract from the beauty of the
modeling along the contour of the neck and face. The integrity of the
head is maintained because the ear is seen in proper value relationship
to the whole. The dark values inside the ear are lighter than the dark
values under the ear and chin. If the values in the ear were too dark,
they would draw attention to the ear.

Plate II, 37. Adolphe-William Bouguereau, _A Pifferaro_. Study painted from life. (_Pifferaro_ [Étude peinte d’après nature].) Whereabouts unknown

A _pifferaro_ was a music-playing Italian shepherd, usually equipped
with a rustic bagpipe or a bassoon. (The duet for oboe and bassoon in
the country dance movement of Beethoven “Pastoral” Symphony imitates the
_pifferari_.) In the nineteenth century they were for hire as party
entertainers and models for painters.

Plate II, 38. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Portrait of Sir John Godsalve_. (_Portrait de Sir John Godsalve._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

On Holbein, see the comments to plate II, 8. This plate is not a
facsimile but rather another “interprétation” of a finished work.

The features are precise; the eyes have both upper and lower lids. The
sharpness of the features differs from the two Italian portraits (plates
II, 12 and II, 31). The device of a fully modeled head contrasting with
a strictly linear body—although extrapolated from the finished drawing
by the copyist—was nonetheless employed by Holbein in other drawings.

Plate II, 39. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Erasmus of Rotterdam_. (_Érasme._) Louvre Museum, Paris

This is a partially finished “interprétation” of Holbein’s oil portrait
of the great humanist scholar. The oil is also in the Louvre Museum in
Paris.

Plate II, 40, _Archer from Aegina, Wearing a Helmet_. (_Sagittaire Éginète, casqué._) Staatliche Antikensammlungen und Glyptothek, Munic

This statue (480 B.C.) is a concoction of ancient and modern parts
assembled and carved by Thorwaldsen to complete the damaged figure of an
archer from the west pediment of the Doric temple of Aphia on the island
of Aegina. Thorwaldsen was attempting to make an archer for the left
side of the triangular pediment to balance the relatively lightly
restored Hercules as archer from the other side of the pediment (see
plate II, 24). New are parts of the helmet and its crest, the head, both
forearms, the hem of the skint, the lower part of the left leg and foot,
and part of the right leg and foot. These restorations are not
identified in the drawing, although they were evident _in situ_ because
of the differences in color of the old and new marble. Thorwaldsen’s
additions were removed in the 1960s, making the remains purely antique
but destroying a great nineteenth-century conception of a primitive
Greek warrior.

Plate II, 41. Michelangelo, _Man Pulling a Rope_. (_Homme au chapelet._) Sistine Chapel, Vatican City

This is yet another figure from Michelangelo’s Last Judgment fresco in
the Sistine Chapel in the Vatican, painted between 1536 and 1542.

Plate II, 42. Michelangelo, _Eve_. (_Ève._) Sistine Chapel, Vatican City

This figure was painted between 1508 and 1512.

Plate II, 43. Raphael, _Woman Carrying Vases_. (_Femme portant des vases._) Sistine Chapel, Vatican City

This drawing is after a famous, oft-copied figure in the fresco Fire in
the Borgo (_Incendio di Borgo_), completed in 1514-17.

Plate II, 44. Raphael, _The Violinist_. (_Le joueur de violon._) Sciarra Collection, Rome

Now ascribed to Sebastiano del Piombo (1485-1547), it was much admired
as a Raphael in the nineteenth century. As a student in Rome in the
early 1840s, Gérôme painted a copy; perhaps he supplied the painting or
a drawing as the model for the lithograph. He certainly suggested its
inclusion. The oil was not only admired by Gérôme but was also praised
by both Bouguereau and Eugène-Emmanuel Amaury-Duval (1806-1885).
Although most of the Sciarra collection was sold in 1898-99, The
Violinist is still in the collection in Rome.

Plate II, 45. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Portrait of Brooke_. (_Portrait de Brooke._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

The sitter is George Brooke, ninth baron of Cobham.

Plate II, 46. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Portrait of a Lady_. (_Portrait de femme._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

Plate II, 47. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Portrait of Lady Elliot_. (_Portrait de lady Elliot._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

The sitter is Margaret, Lady Elliot. Her name is misspelled on the
drawing.

Plate II, 48. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Portrait of William_, marquess of Northampton. (_Portrait de William, marquess de Northampton._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

The sitter is William Parr, first marquess of Northampton.

Plate II, 49. Jules Breton (1827-1905), _The Servant_. (_La servante._) Whereabouts unknown

This is a “facsimile of a drawing after nature.” A contemporary of
Gérôme, Pierre Puvis de Chavannes (1824-1898) and Bouguereau, Breton was
a famous and prolific painter of peasant scenes.

Plate II, 50. Jean-Léon Gérôme, _The Dog of Alcibiades_. (_Le chien d’Alcibiade._) Baron Martin Museum, Gray, France

A study (“painted from nature”) for Alcibiades’s dog in the 1861
painting Alcibiades in the House of Aspasia (_Alcibiade chez Aspasie_).

Plate II, 51. Michelangelo, _Man Sitting on a Sack_. (_L’homme au sac._) Sistine Chapel, Vatican City

This drawing is after a figure in a fresco (1508-12) on the ceiling of
the Sistine Chapel in the Vatican. The anatomy in the original is not
totally correct, and the copy compounds Michelangelo’s errors. The right
shoulder and arm are exaggerated in size. Michelangelo’s ability,
however, comes through in the rhythmical disposition of the parts, which
gives the body a sense of grace and movement.

Plate II, 52. Thomas Couture (1815-1879), _Portrait of a Young Boy_. (_Portrait d’un jeune garcon._) Whereabouts unknown

Couture had a distinguished career, although several large commissions
from the French government remained unfinished because of the political
upheavals during his lifetime. Known primarily for his large history
paintings executed in a loose, individual style, he had many students,
among them Anselm Feuerbach (1829~ 1880), Edouard Manet (1832-1883),
William Morris Hunt (1824-1879), and Puvis de Chavannes. Couture
utilizes another manner of drawing the hair; compare it to the handling
of hair by Henner (plate II, 17) and by Gleyre (plate I, 36). Couture
uses long strokes of the charcoal for the general direction of the
growth patterns and general veiling to indicate the top and lower planes
of the head. Praiseworthy skill is evident in the drawing of the
foreshortened ear, in the slight toning for the depression between the
nasal bone and the nasal eminence, and in the gradual shading on the
left cheek. The end of the nose has a planar quality, separating it from
its sides.

Plate II, 53. Jules Lefebvre, _Head of a Woman_. (_Tête de femme._) Whereabouts unknown

On Lefebvre, see comments to plate II, 34.

Plate II, 54. Timoléon Lobrichon (1831-1914), _Study of a Baby_. (_Étude d’enfant._) Whereabouts unknown

Lobrichon was a student of Frangois-Edouard Picot. In the 1850s he was
associated with the Néo-Grecs, a group of painters, headed by Gérôme,
who composed genre scenes set in antiquity. Later he painted mothers and
children in modern settings.

This complete figure will aid you in understanding the difficulties of
drawing babies, where baby fat and the surface bones dominate the shape
and contours of the body and limbs. Note how the hair radiates from the
crown of the head. Throughout outlines are strong, even in interior
forms. The technique is similar to Holbein’s in plates II, 19 and I, 60.

Plate II, 55. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Portrait of N. Poyntz_. (_Portrait de N. Poyntz._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

The sitter is Sir Nicolas Poyntz. The plate is inscribed with an added
signature N. Poines Knight.

Plate II, 56. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Portrait of Lady Hanegham_. (_Portrait de lady Hanegham._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

Plate II, 57. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Portrait of the Wife of Jacques Meyer_. (_Portrait de la femme de Jacques Meyer._) Offentliche Kunstsammlung Basel, Kupferstichkabinett

Dorothea Kannengiesser and her husband, Jakob Meyer, the mayor of Basel,
were drawn twice by Holbein, and the Kunstmuseum has both sets of
drawings. This is from the second set and is dated 1525-26.

Plate II, 58. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Portrait of a Young Man_. (_Portrait d’un jeune homme._) Whereabouts unknown

The style of this drawing is very close to that of Holbein’s illustrious
father, Hans Holbein the Elder (ca. 1465- ca. 1524). It may be an early
drawing by the younger Holbein.

Plate II, 59. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Portrait of Lord Vaux_. (_Portrait de lord Vaux._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

The sitter is Thomas, the second Lord Vaux.

Plate II, 60. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Thomas_, Count of Surrey. (_Portrait de Thomas, comte de Surrey._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

The sitter is now identified as Henry Howard, earl of Surrey.

Holbein’s naturalistic observations vie with the almost perfect oval of
the face, as if he were subordinating nature to geometry. The faintly
indicated clothing contrasts with the high finish of the face;
individual strokes describe individual hairs; and the features of the
face are very precise. Holbein is a master of the facial structure
around the eye.

Plate II, 61. Philippe Parrot (1831-1894), _Bather_, study of a young girl. (_Baigneuse._ [Étude de jeune fille].) Whereabouts unknown

Another “interprétation” of a painting. Now almost forgotten, Parrot
specialized in portraits and elegant nudes in mythological guise.

Plate II, 62. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Portrait of a Man_. (_Portrait d’homme._) Whereabouts unknown

Before World War II this drawing was in the collection of the duke of
Weimar, in Weimar, Germany. The attribution to Holbein the Younger is
not certain.

Plate II, 63. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Clinton_. (_Clinton._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

The sitter is Edward, ninth earl of Clinton. Although the drawing is
located at Windsor Castle by Goupil, it cannot be found in any catalogue
of the collection.

Plate II, 64. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Portrait of a Lady_. (_Portrait de femme._) Whereabouts unknown

Plate II, 65. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Portrait of a Man_. (_Portrait d’homme._) Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Library, Windsor Castle

Plate II, 66. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Lady of the Court of Henry IV_. (_Dame de la cour de Henri IV._) Offentliche Kunstsammlung Basel, Kupferstichkabinett

The sitter is Lady Guildford. This is a poor rendition of a masterful
drawing by Holbein.

[Fig. 24] 

Plate II, 67. Hans Holbein the Younger, _Portrait of a Man_. (_Portrait d’homme._) Offentliche Kunstsammlung Basel, Kupferstichkabinett

This is a sketch (1516) for one of the two paintings on panel of Jakob
Meyer and his wife, also in the Kunstmuseum Basel (see comments to plate
II, 57). In an extremely efficient manner Holbein has given much
attention to the features of the face—such as the slight sag of the skin
around Meyer’s mouth and his chin—without detracting from the simplicity
of the presentation. The clothing is simply outlined. In the finished
oil it is painted from life. In the original preparatory drawing (see
fig. 24) Holbein used silverpoint and red chalk.



PART III: PREPARATION FOR DRAWING _ACADÉMIES_ (_EXERCICES AU FUSAIN POUR PRÉPARER À L’ÉTUDE DE L’ACADÉMIE D’APRÈS NATURE_)


Introduction

In general art-historical usage, an _académie_ means a drawing or a
painting of a nude model in a pose considered “noble and classic.”
Highly finished charcoal drawings of male nudes were produced in such
numbers in art academies that the institution became synonymous with its
most representative product.

Female models were not used in life drawing classes at
nineteenth-century academies until sometime after the middle of the
century. Students were expected to learn how to draw the female nude
from statuary and other works of art, such as the models in the first
and second parts of Bargue’s Drawing Course. This was true even at the
École des Beaux-Arts. Thus, the term _académie_ in Bargue’s title for
the third part is the most restrictive use of the term: the seventy
drawings are all of male nudes.

The mastery of the nude male body was considered the most important part
of the artist’s repertoire, for it was taken for granted—in the
persistent patriarchal worldview—that males were the most important
members of society; for all practical purposes, they were also the most
important characters in the historical and biblical subjects academy
students were instructed to paint. Despite the fact that history
paintings had gradually gone out of favor after the middle of the
century—and that it had always been easier to sell a painting of a nude
female than of a nude male-intense study of the male nude persisted
until late in the nineteenth century. During the twentieth century the
practice changed; now females are the favored models in art schools and
drawing groups.

The results of the nineteenth-century practice can be seen in the works
of Gérôme. In the lycée in his hometown of Vesoul there were no live
models at all in any of the drawing and painting courses Gérôme took.
When he left Vesoul and went to Paris in 1839, he studied in the
ateliers of Delaroche and Gleyre; only the latter is known to have used
female models, but Gérôme’s time with Gleyre was a mere six months.
Although his male nudes were, from the start of his career, both
accurate and learned, it is easy to see from his early paintings that he
had learned the female form by studying Greek statuary: his nude women
are geometrically idealized, with taut skin over rounded forms, and with
particularly firm, hemispherical breasts. Not until relatively late in
his life—probably influenced by the growing severity of the standards of
Realism—did Gérôme produce female nudes that seem to be drawn, painted,
or sculpted from live models.


Ancient Sculpture as the Model of True Beauty: The Prevalence of Male Models

The nineteenth-century preference for male nudes as studio models had an
old and embedded philosophical tradition behind it. The preference,
nurtured and developed over a long period, was based on some tenets of
Neoplatonism. The term covers a series of independent and different
philosophical schools of thought in ancient and recent times, all sects
or varieties of which were ultimately based on the dialogues of the
ancient Greek philosopher Plato (4272-347 B.C.). Neoplatonism
flourished, in various forms, into the seventh century A.D., when it was
suppressed first by the Christians and then the Muslims as pagan,
although many Neoplatonic ideas had already been assimilated by
Christian theology. The interest of the humanists of the fifteenth
century in ancient texts and philosophies led to a revival of
Neoplatonic thought in several forms (such as philosophy, mysticism, and
theurgy), branches of Neoplatonism that have influenced Western thought
down through modern times. Popular astrology, for instance, is organized
according to a Neoplatonic system: the planets are intermediaries
between a higher, spiritual, reality and our world.

The belief by Plato that an independent, intelligible reality exists
above and outside our sensible, material world is the basis of all
schools of Neoplatonism. This higher reality is the realm of the truth,
of values and principles that are the basis of our intellectual and
moral life. The purpose of philosophy was the attainment of knowledge of
these principles through study, instruction, ritual, revelation, and
restraint of the senses (denial of the flesh). At the most elevated
level it could result in a union of the individual soul with the highest
sphere of the cosmos.

Human attainment of knowledge about the true principles was endangered
by the lower emotions, which were aroused by the distracting sensory
experience of the material world, or, as Christians saw it, a struggle
between the spirit and the flesh. The sensory experience of this lower,
material world evokes the lower emotions—lust, anger, gluttony, pride,
envy, greed, sloth—which can consume our energies, weaken our judgment,
and obscure the guidance of the higher principles, which already
exist—instilled by God for our guidance—in our minds, thus delaying or
destroying our ability to understand the true, absolute, and immutable
principles or truths, such as piety, honor, obedience, justice, the
Good, beauty, and so forth. To live an enlightened and blessed life, one
had to free one’s self from the domination of the senses, while
clarifying to the point of unambiguous purity the concepts of the higher
truths in our minds. Odd as it may seem, despite this antisensual
argument, art—in particular the depiction of the nude human body—was
seen as an aid in the pursuit of truth.

In Plato’s dialogue Phaedrus the love for a beautiful youth is described
as an aid to comprehending the higher principles of the mind. Even
though love is evoked by the youth’s physical beauty, the latter still
provides an insight into the nature of true beauty, an insight that
could lead to the knowledge of other absolute truths or principles
planted by the creator in the mind but nonetheless difficult to access.*

It is important to stress that the path opened by physical beauty to
true knowledge is also the path away from sensory or erotic
entanglements. Giving in to the senses would not only debase the
relationship of lovers but would further entangle them in the material
world and obscure their understanding of higher principles. (Hence the
popular expression “Platonic love.”) Without embarrassment, this belief
that falling in love could lead to spiritual enlightenments was revived
by several Neoplatonists of the Italian Renaissance.

The idealized male body, especially as exemplified in the sculpture of
antiquity, became a paradigm of true beauty. This pagan association of
virtue and beauty can be sensed in many ancient sculptures as well as in
the works of the ardent Christian and fervent Neoplatonist,
Michelangelo, as in his famous statue of David and his poetry.

In the eighteenth century Renaissance Neoplatonism informed the thought
of Johann Joachim Winckelmann (1717-1768), the founder of archeology and
a prolific writer on ancient art. While studying Greek sculpture, he
decided that the beauty of the Greek depiction of male bodies was due
not to idealization by Greek sculptors but rather to the perfect bodies
of their models, the Greek men of antiquity. Moreover, these men were
more beautiful than modern men because they were simply better people.
The idea that the contemplation of natural male beauty opened the door
to fa belle nature—the pure and eternal idea of nature in the mind—and
that this could lead to other higher truths remained popular into the
second half of the nineteenth century. Thus, through several
manifestations the influence of Plato may be seen lurking beneath the
exclusive use of male models in the Ecole des Beaux-Arts until late in
the nineteenth century, which is reflected in the third part of the
Drawing Course.

The ancient statuary of female nudes likewise presented women in an
already idealized and ideal form. From the Renaissance on, most
artists—docile, chaste, timid, or shy—used ancient statuary as models
from which to learn how to pose females and how to depict their anatomy.
In a pinch when dealing with a difficult pose, artists often used a male
model— preferably slightly plump—to pose for a female figure; in
addition to substituting a female head, they made a few bodily
adjustments to feminize their drawing, such as adding breasts or
thickening the hips. As the female nude began to predominate in Western
art, its “rarefied beauty” and purity were praised; the simplification
of natural forms through geometry, such as hemispherical breasts,
represented a step toward the ideal, and hence toward moral thought.

Nonetheless, the counterargument—that viewing an image of a nude woman
put the male viewer in moral peril of experiencing an erotic reaction or
of harboring impure thoughts—was an important and persistent position.
Thus, it was argued for centuries that both female and male nude bodies,
if depicted, should be presented in an idealized manner, bereft of
direct erotic stimulus. In France between 1875 and 1881 official censors
inspected and approved prints and photographs of nudes before they could
be put on public display or sold in shops. Despite this review, many
approved prints and photos of nudes could not be displayed in shop
windows. After 1881 the police were empowered to arrest those who made
an offensive public display of a nude in a shop window, on a magazine or
a book cover. If a trial ensued, the defense would usually argue that
the nude, no matter how lasciviously depicted, was purified, with
rounded, geometrical, unnatural forms—“like a sculpture”—and that the
depiction was aimed at the higher consciousness and consequently was
unlikely to arouse the lower emotions. The defense often won. In 1888 a
lawyer defended a nude on the cover of the magazine _Le Courrier
Français_ by pointing out that no genitalia were visible and that “the
marmoreal bust with its imaginary rigidity and strength bears no trace
of realism… I see nothing more here than an admirably pure body, its
lines powerful and chaste…”

Even so, students were thought to benefit in some practical sense from
this philosophical preference for male nudes. Human anatomy was believed
easier to grasp by observing the thinner, angular bodies of males than
the fuller, rounder figures of females. It was thought easier to
maintain discipline among the usually rowdy students—all male in most
academies and art schools until very late in the nineteenth century—when
the nude model was a male. Furthermore the teachers and administrators
thought that they were protecting the morals of their students by
shielding them from the power of the lower, sensual emotions that would
be evoked by the depiction of a nude woman, especially one who was
considered “available” (the popular assumption being that any woman who
bared herself for money was of doubtful virtue). Even after the
introduction of female models into the drawing classes in the mid or
late nineteenth century, the general public, artists, and students often
regarded and treated female models as no better than prostitutes.


Practical Matters: Copying the Drawings

As the title of this section indicates, these drawings of posed nude
males are meant as preparation for drawing after live models in a
studio. These exercises—the careful, exact copying of good drawings
after a model—are meant to be executed in charcoal, as was the practice
when drawing after a model posed in the studio. A good _académie_ in
charcoal should take at least fifteen hours, if not longer. Your copy
should be developed and finished according to the steps in the first
part (see the section entitled “Suggestions for Copying the Plates”).

These _académies_ are remarkable inventions of Bargue. You will come to
appreciate them more and more as you work with them; your admiration
will intensify when you start drawing from live models. Even so, the
procedure—from schema to outline to shadows—was not Bargue’s invention;
it was standard practice in art schools and studios in the nineteenth
century.

The drawings in this part are almost pure outline drawings, without
shading or background; there are only sparse internal indications of
anatomical features. Even if you are fairly advanced and sure of
yourself, you should start out with the simpler, early plates, thereby
making sure you grasp Bargue’s procedural method.

The first two parts of the course were designed to make you see the
essential elements of a figure and teach you a procedure for drawing
from a model. The drawings in the third part stress structure and unity
as opposed to seeing bodily parts separately. The large
factors—character, pose, and proportion—are more important than surface
detail. A quick perusal of the pages of the third part discloses just
how little internal information Bargue puts within the outline: faces
are left blank and hands and feet are often indicated by schematic
lines. Furthermore, the complexities of the outline of the body are
often reduced to straight lines between points, as in the first schemata
for the cast drawings in the first part. Despite the fact that there is
little internal musculature, the figures are both simple and
successfully articulated.

As this is preparatory practice for drawing a nude from life, it is best
to simulate the working conditions of drawing from a model in a studio.
(In all the drawings in this part, the model is assumed to be on a
platform at least 40 centimeters [16 inches] in height. This will put
the eyes of a seated model about level with an artist standing at his
easel—an ideal height for portraiture—and will result in the artist
looking up at a standing nude.) This is best done by working with the
Bargue _académie_ and your drawing paper side by side or on a wall or on
a straight (not angled) easel. (Students working without instructors
should first carefully read appendix 2. Knowledge of sight-size
practices will help students better understand many of the suggestions
in the comments on the individual plates.)

At times the straight lines with which Bargue first captured the shape
of certain parts of the body may seem like mannerisms, that is, traits
or features reflecting a personal style; in practice these straight
lines are tools that indicate the peaks of the planes on the surface of
the body, which are demarcated by the protruding anatomical features
under the skin. The straight lines do not retain their abstraction in
the shed drawing, where they are usually rounded out to achieve a
natural appearance. The schema—the resulting silhouette of connected
outlines—is just the first step. And if you have worked through or from
the plates in part I, you know how to proceed once you have outlined the
figure. In part III only the last few drawings are finished: no shadow
line has been developed and filled in and, of course, no halftones have
been recorded. If you were working from a live model, you would be
expected to finish the procedure, to produce a finished drawing with
most of the surface modeled. Bargue teaches you to correctly draw the
structure before you start adding the finishing touches, as well as how
to determine the correct proportions of the outside shape of the
subject; otherwise the interior features will not fit in correctly. You
may continue making or checking your estimates by stepping back and
measuring them at a distance; eventually you will make the measurements
without a tool. Checking your drawing by comparing it with the model
viewed in a hand mirror is always helpful.

With the Bargue drawing and your drawing side by side, you will soon
learn to see errors. Remember, if these drawings were to be used as
models for a painting, any inaccuracies would be compounded once you
tried to fill in the interior. Such strictness is necessary both to
teach you how to see and transcribe a human being’s form correctly and
to purge your own practice of any mannerisms or impreciseness that you
may have already acquired.

The Drawing Course was published on full folio sheets, about four times
as large as the reproductions in this book. If you are working in
charcoal, you should take the book to a photocopy shop that has a good
laser printer and have the drawing you wish to copy enlarged in color
two or three times. It will be easier to see and understand Bargue’s
linear decisions in a larger drawing; many details would be virtually
impossible to copy in a small scale, especially in charcoal. If you wish
to copy directly from the book, you should work in pencil.


Some Notes on Bargue’s Style

Bargue’s use of straight lines seems intuitive rather than programmatic.
In some complex anatomical areas (calves, knees, elbows, biceps, hands,
and feet) he usually uses straight lines as a deliberate simplification.
Whenever there is a lot of information to transcribe, the outlines of
his forms generally tend toward straight lines. Just as often he uses a
long, simple, sensuous and elegant line, slightly curved, taking in
several dots. The virtuosity of these passages makes it seem as if he
were performing for us, in comparison to the short, choppy units in the
other passages.

The angles, both concave and convex, that change the contours of the
figure imperceptibly are all based on internal anatomical features:
swelling of muscles; attachments of tendons to bones; emerging surface
bones; flexed muscles or fat. Emphasizing the protuberances of internal
anatomical features punctuates the outline, clarifies the inner
structure, and gives fullness to the contours. It takes a good knowledge
of anatomy to see and articulate these features.

Bargue’s abstraction of the figure involves more than the simplification
of planes and outlines. Each of his figures has a singular rhythm that
subordinates and subsumes the details—or, rather, unites them: each
element supports the overall effect of the pose and the direction of the
gestures.

Bargue uses overlapping lines to emphasize the structure of the body (as
in plate III, 38). These lines assist in the foreshortening since they
indicate if one form or muscle is in front of another. Bargue is
particularly well versed in the construction of joints and the knee: he
always indicates the patella, the protuberances of the condyles of the
fibula and tibia, and the connecting tendons for the larger leg muscles
that anchor themselves around the knee. Similarly, Bargue often records
accented forms caused by folds in the flesh or pits like the navel,
axillae, and the pit of the neck.

Bargue’s indication of interior anatomy is almost calligraphic,
particularly in the legs. These indications are drawn with a bit of
brio. Some contours are quite refined, with Bargue recording all the
expected changes in curvature (see the legs in plates I, 18, 19, and
37). Others are drawn in a more economical, “off the cuff” manner. For
example, in plate I, 32 Bargue audaciously draws the outer contour of
the left leg with a single sweeping arc that is interrupted only by the
bend in the knee; in plate III, 41 the outer side of the right leg is a
sinuous s-curve,


A Repertoire of Traditional Poses

In the many studies in part III Gérôme and Bargue have included a
repertoire of traditional poses, some of which might occasionally have
been useful to history or narrative painters. They were certainly useful
to students at the École des Beaux-Arts in Paris, many of whom intended
to compete for the Prix de Rome. A list of the recognizable poses
follows.

_Rhetorical poses_: plates III, 10 and 37.

_Allegorical figures_: plates III, 28 and 40 (melancholy); plate III, 29
(grief or mourning (he could be holding an urn or a libation vessel);
plate III, 37 (prayer); plate III, 39 (grief); plate III, 47
(astonishment).

_Action figures_: plate III, 12 (David with his sling); plate II, 38 (an
archer); plate I, 46 (a man tugging); plate III, 45 (stretching).

_Famous figures_: plate III, 24, Hippolyte Flandrin’s Young Man Seated
on a Rock, study (_Jeune Homme nu assis sur un rocher. Figure d’étude_);
plate III, 33, after Michelangelo’s Dying Slave (_L’Esclave mourant_)
(fig. 13); plate II, 35, the Dying Gaul (_Gaulois mourant_) at the
Capitoline Museum in Rome.

_Biblical figures_: plate III, 12 (David); plate III, 15 (Saint John the
Baptist or a shepherd); plate III, 18 (a shepherd); plate III, 36 (Adam
expulsed from Paradise); plate III, 42 (_Ecce Homo_); plate II, 44 (Abel
dead, the dead Christ, or a martyr).

_Traditional women’s poses_: plate III, 17 (examining a bird’s nest);
plate III, 50 (a bather).


Notes on the Plates (III)

Plate III, 1. Young man, leaning on his right elbow. (_Jeune homme, accoudé sur le bras droit._)

The first drawing is the most simplified of all the figure drawings,
reduced to an almost abstract figure of straight lines and angles; the
emphasis is on proportion. Bargue wants you to begin the figure with
straight lines right from the start. We suggest a plumb line from the
bottom of the stand upon which the boy is sitting, through the margin of
the stomach, and up the back of the neck. This is a popular, effective
pose for a full-length portrait.

Plate III, 2. Young boy, standing while leaning on a box. (_Jeune garçon, debout accoudé à un mur._)

This is a funerary or mourning pose. The weight is divided between the
feet and elbows. Pay attention to the very faint construction lines that
travel between the buttocks and the upper body. Note: the line of the
stand is an absolute vertical.

Plate III, 3. Standing man, walking, rear view. (_Homme debout, marchant, de dos._)

This drawing of a fighter is more developed than the previous twos: the
arms, the hair, and the shoulders are more detailed; the pose, with its
many foreshortenings, is more sophisticated. In places the outline cuts
into the body, following the shape of a muscle. These overlappings are
one of the techniques Bargue teaches. The outer limits of the scapula
are clear on his right side, while its inner limit is indicated inside
the back. The bones of the elbows show through the skin. The lower part
of the raised arm is drawn with two quick, overlapping lines. This is a
pure outline, as if all the light were coming from the front, flattening
the form. A light from a window or a lamp would cast a clear shadow
across the body, as in most of the cast drawings in part 1. The shadow
line should be drawn first and then the shadow filled in with an even
tone; the halftones may be added next. However, shadows are not recorded
in most of the figure drawings of part III, I suggest a plumb line from
the lower tip of the ear, through the knee, to the left toe. When
drawing from nature—such as a studio model—it is best to make your first
reference points from the bottom up. Although it does not make much
difference when you are working from a drawing, you might start forming
the habit of doing so now. With a model the position of the feet would
be marked on the stand and would always be in the same place. The rest
of the body will sway and move as the pose settles in. As a consequence,
secure reference points taken from the feet will always be useful and
assuring,

Plate III, 4. Standing young man, leaning on a box, front view. (_Jeune homme debout de face, appuyé sur un mur._)

This simple pose, with the emphasis on the outline, has only minor areas
of foreshortening. There are some careful indications of anatomy in the
upper body and arms. An important area is the interlocking of the models
left hand with the waist. In some areas you can guide yourself by the
distances across empty spaces outside the figure, between limbs and the
body (the so-called negative spaces). A good plumb line could run from
the left side of his neck or the top of the little toe of the standing
leg.

Plate III, 5. Standing young man leaning on a box while holding up his left arm, front view. (_Jeune homme debout, de face, appuyé sur un mur, levant le bras gauche._)

The model in this drawing was probably holding onto a pole or a rope
suspended from the ceiling, There is tension in various parts of the
body; pay attention to how this tension is shown and how it affects the
anatomy. His right arm is very accurately foreshortened. Leaning on the
box produces a tilt of the rib cage and gives an angle to the hips. An
axis or medial line through the head and torso will help organize the
proportions of the upper body; furthermore, the symmetrical features of
the body will align themselves more or less perpendicular to the line.

Plate III, 6. Standing young man, leaning on a pole, left leg set back, side view. (_Jeune homme debout, de côté, appuyé sur un bâton, jambe gauche en arrière._)

This is a sensuous, serpentine pose with a surprising sense of movement
initiated by the act of looking over the shoulder. There are broad and
subtle overlappings along the back and shoulders. The plumb line can run
from the right heel to the back side of the head.

Plate III, 7. Standing young man holding a pole behind himself in his left hand. (_Jeune homme debout tenant un bâton de la main gauche derrière lui._)

The young man could be pulling a sword out of a scabbard, albeit with
his left hand. Concentrate on the rhythms of the muscles in the arm and
legs. The plumb line runs from the part of his hair through his right
foot.

Plate III, 8. Standing young man, right hand on his head, rear view. (_Jeune homme debout de dos, main droite sur la tête._)

The angles of the arms and legs are set in rhythmic response to one
another. The main weight is on the left leg, although equilibrium is
maintained by the right leg. The negative spaces are small but critical
since they indicate that the legs are not touching. On the model’s back
Bargue uses predominantly straight lines to describe internal structure.

Plate III, 9. Standing young boy holding a pole, head turned toward the pole. (_Jeune garçon debout tenant un bâton, tête tournée vers le bâton._)

The only areas of pronounced foreshortening are in the legs and feet.
The pole forms a safe negative space along the boy’s right contour,
which you can use to check your measurements and your shapes.

Plate III, 10. Standing man holding out his right hand, rear view. (_Homme debout de dos tendant la main droite._)

This could be the stance of an orator conceding a point (with his hand
upturned); or it could be a repoussoir figure framing the central event
of a history painting. The tension of the pose is described in several
parts of the outline, particularly in the waist and thighs. The plumb
fine could run from the peak of the head to the inside right ankle.

Plate III, 11. Seated man, rear view. (_Homme assis de dos._)

After a popular studio pose, this is a more advanced, lifelike study.
The outline is accurate, especially along the left side of the back, and
the upper part of the leg. Light lines describe the medial line of the
figure, and some of the internal structure. The weight of the body is
emphasized by the flat fine of the buttock and the bulging flesh above
it.

Plate III, 12. Standing young man, right hand on left shoulder. (_Jeune homme debout, main gauche sur épaule droite._)

This could be the biblical David with his sling over his shoulder,
getting ready to shift his weight forward (notice the tilt of the
pelvis) for the pitch. The plumb line is from the peak of the head down.
You may need vertical reference lines to assist you in plotting this
narrow figure. In a free-standing pose the head is always positioned
over the weight-bearing or standing leg (the other leg is sometimes
referred to as the free or play leg).

Plate III, 13. Standing young boy holding a pole, legs crossed. (_Jeune garçon tenant un bâton, jambes croisées._)

The visible hand and the feet are drawn with great clarity and emphasis.
Watch the proportions of the slightly foreshortened left arm. The pole
steadies the model and furnishes an extra reference line from which to
judge. This drawing also demonstrates that the head is usually
positioned over the weight-bearing leg (although here it tilts slightly
off center due to the support by the pole).

Plate III, 14. Standing young man turning his back, hands crossed behind him. (_Jeune garçon debout tournant le dos, mains croisées dans le dos._)

This could be a prisoner tied from behind. The angular outline stresses
the boniness of the young body. There are obvious anatomical notations
on the back, such as the scapulae, and more subtle ones on the legs,
such as the tendons of the hamstring. The plumb line runs from the top
of the neck to the inner right ankle.

Plate III, 15. Standing older man leaning against a stand while holding. (_Vieil homme debout adossé à un mur tenant un bâton._)

The vague support—a wall or a stand—is clearly improvised; nevertheless
sketch it in so that you will not forget how the weight is distributed
in the stance. Observe how a faint line has organized the angles of the
man’s lower chest and bell. This observation relates nicely to the
method taught in part 1. Moreover, there are many negative spaces to
help further organize the limbs. The plumb fine runs from the peak of
the head to the right toe.

Plate III, 16. Seated man, leaning on a wall. (_Homme assis, accoudé sur un mur._)

There are few straight lines in this splendid pose. The seated young man
leans back against a table, so that all of the body recedes: the face is
back, the hip forward. Study the position of the back and the upper
torso. There are many good lessons in foreshortening in the drawing: one
leg comes forward, the other goes back; the torso leans away from the
viewer, the head is behind the shoulder; and the right arm reaches back,
foreshortening the upper arm as well as the forearm.

Plate III, 17. Seated young boy, holding an object in front of him in his hands. (_Jeune garcon assis, tenant un objet devant lui dans ses mains._)

This is a moody pose, as if the boy were reading his fortune in a
teacup. All the forms are lean and sinuous. His left leg, however,is in
an inelegant view (a situation that often arises when models are
carelessly posed and may be inevitable when many students work from the
same model). Relate the right leg to the left as you draw.

Plate III, 18. Standing young man leaning on a pole. (_Jeune homme debout appuyé sur un bâton._)

This is a shepherd’s pose. The young man is not so graceful as some of
the other models; his legs are knobby and long. Pay attention to the
articulation of the elbows and knees, which are described by Bargue with
overlapping lines.

Plate III, 19. Standing young man, frontal view, with hand on chin. (_Jeune homme debout de face, main sur le menton._)

This could be either a pensive or pugilistic pose. Is he sizing up his
opponent or simply dreaming? Although the model has articulated fingers,
the toes are summarily indicated. The loincloth is elegant in that it
does not obscure the silhouette. Part of each arm is in foreshortening.
Study the marks that Bargue makes for internal features. Usually they
describe the boundaries of major anatomical forms as well as the center
lines of the torso. The plumb line runs from the right comer of the face
to the inner ankle of the models left foot.

Plate III, 20. Standing young boy leaning on a stand, left leg crossed behind the right leg. (_Jeune garçon debout accoudé à un mur, jambe gauche croisée derrière la droite._)

In this highly developed drawing, the arms, hair, shoulders, legs, and
feet are all detailed. The pose is sophisticated: the parts of the body
are arranged in interesting juxtapositions. Notice the overlapping of
muscles on the legs. Carefully measure the foreshortening of the
reclining upper arm. The several negative spaces can be used as guides
to the shapes around them. Such sharp lines show the angles produced by
the bones, whereas the softer lines show muscle and fat.

Plate III, 21. Seated young man, three-quarter view, hair somewhat long. (_Jeune homme assis, trois quarts, cheveux mi-longs._)

The slump of the torso is shown by curves, the boniness of the arms and
legs by straight lines. Bargue’s main interest is in the upper body,
particularly in the tension of the supporting left arm. The plumb line
runs from the peak of his face to the side of the box. This helps in
measuring the distance from the box to the left toe, and so forth. In
addition to a plumb line, extra horizontal reference lines (all
perpendicular to the plumb line) would help to organize the various
areas, say, through the top of the box under the buttocks and through
the navel and left elbow.

Plate III, 22. Man in profile, leaning to the right. (_Homme de profil, penchant à droite._)

This is a pose with some action or movement indicated. It is a
successful drawing, especially in the forms of the two arms. It is
important to transcribe the negative spaces accurately. The tension
between the left and right side of the contour is subtle and sensitive;
small deviations in the contours may detract from the roundness of the
figure. Work from side to side across the form and notice the variety of
the contours. Normally a depression on one side will be paired with a
swelling on the other. Again, some well-placed horizontals will help
divide the figure into manageable areas.

Plate III, 23. Standing man, right hand on a stand. (_Homme debout, main droite posée sur un mur._)

In this classic pose the head tilts back with a hopeful expression. The
left knee is locked to indicate support and the belly protrudes forward
gently, adding grace and movement to the pose. You need horizontals here
as well as a plumb line.

Plate III, 24. Man seated upon the ground, his head on his knees. (_Homme assis sur le sol, tête sur les genoux._)

The youth in this splendid drawing holds a pose similar to that in the
famous painting of 1836 by Hippolyte Flandin entitled Young Nude Boy
Seated by the Sea, study (_Jeune homme nu assis au bord de la mer.
Étude_), in the Louvre Museum in Paris. The areas of greatest interest
are his right arm and hands, the vertebrae on the back of the neck, and
the blocky feet. You’ll need horizontals as well as a plumb line to
organize your work.

Plate III, 25. Standing man, seen from behind. (_Homme debout de dos._)

A back view is always difficult because of the ever-changing morphology
of bones, muscles, and fat. This is an older model, and the muscles and
fat under the skin have sagged in a few places. The weight displacement
is on his left leg, throwing the left hip up and the right one down. The
foreshortened right foot is obscured, making it difficult to copy. You
have to measure the angle of the foot from a horizontal. Bargue’s
attention to structure and the shift of bodily weight is as refined as
his subtle notations of age. This drawing is a splendid example of the
mixture of the idealist and realist interests of the Academic Realists.

Plate III, 26. Standing young man, holding a pole in his left hand while looking at it. (_Jeune garcon debout, tenant un bâton de sa main gauche et le regardant._)

This is a well-developed drawing with accurate proportions. The gesture
is subtle: the boy looks up toward the pole in his left hand (as if he
were admiring a banner lost to our view); he shifts his weight to the
right leg, and moves his left leg back. As a result, his shoulders and
hips tilt at opposing angles. Opposing angles similarly animate the
fingers, which are carefully arranged on his left hand.

Plate III, 27. Standing man, in profile, holding out his open left hand. (_Homme debout de profil tendant la main gauche ouverte._)

This subtle drawing emphasizes the placing of the weight on the model’s
left leg. The head is clear in its turn and structure. The hand bent
back by the akimbo arm is noteworthy; the other hand—held in a position
that a model would find hard to maintain—seems to have given Bargue
trouble. This hand appears to have been added later; its gesture is not
supported by any connection with the body, which inevitably makes it
look too large. Such an effect was perhaps unavoidable given this pose.
The classical rule is to choose a view in which all major joints are
visible.

Plate III, 28. Young man seated on a box, his right hand supporting his head. (_Jeune garçon assis sur une caisse, main droite soutenant la tête._)

Traditionally a cheek resting on the hand of a seated figure represents
melancholy. The most famous examples are Direr’s 1514 engraving
Melancholia I and Rodin’s 1880 statue The Thinker (_Le Penseur_).
Melancholy is one of the traditional four humors (or temperaments) that
determine human physiognomy and personality. The humors were an integral
part of the Neoplatonic system; even today they are embedded, albeit
discreetly, in popular astrology. The emphasis is on the supporting left
arm; notice the taut deltoid and scapula. Faint construction lines are
visible throughout, and there are indications of the ulna and patellae.
The hand is carefully blocked out to show its importance and to balance
it with the foreshortened arm and hand holding up his head. Use
horizontal reference lines as needed.

Plate III, 29. Young man in profile holding a ball. (_Jeune homme de profil tenant une balle._)

The figure holds a ball, putting the biceps of the arm in flexion to
support the weight; the tension runs down the right side of the body
through the locked knee. The far side of the body, not bearing the
weight, is relaxed and lowered. The entire torso from buttock to neck is
exemplary. The chest, belly, and thigh are described by a single curved
line.

Plate III, 30. Standing man in three-quarter view, holding a pole with both hands, his left leg crossed over the right. (_Homme debout de trois quarts, tenant un bâton à deux mains, pied gauche croisé devant le pied droit._)

This drawing of a mature man with fairly well-developed anatomy
emphasizes gesture and movement. Compare him with other models, such as
in plate III, 33, and note how his contours differ from the younger men.
The right foot seems to be an undeveloped thought.

Plate III, 31. Seated man in profile, his hands crossed on his left knee. (_Homme assis en profil, les mains croisées sur genou gauche._)

This is an excellent example of a well-proportioned figure with
judicious indications of anatomy. The negative shapes are clear and
therefore helpful. The foremost leg is accurately drawn. The arms are
twisted over one another. Make sure you pay attention to the rhythms in
the outlines of the legs and arms by precisely placing the high and low
parts of their curves, all the while comparing one side of the contour
to the other. Draw the left and right sides at the same time, using the
internal indications of anatomy to guide you.

Plate III, 32. Standing young man, right arm resting on his head. (_Jeune homme debout, bras droit posé sur la tête._)

When copying this model remember that the two legs are on different
planes!

Plate III, 33. Standing man, right hand on his chest, left hand on his head. (_Homme debout, main droite sur la poitrine, main gauche sur la tête._)

The model imitates the pose of Michelangelo’s Dying Slave (_L’Esclave
mourant_) in the Louvre Museum in Paris (studied in plate III, 30 and
shown complete in fig, 13). The view is higher than in the other
drawings. Notice how the feet steady the body, as if he were standing on
an incline. Be sure to maintain the character of the model’s maturity
throughout the drawing; his limbs are thicker and more muscular than
those of a youthful body. The drawing of the right arm and of the right
leg is noteworthy.

Plate III, 34. Standing young man, turning his head to the left, right hand extended. (_Jeune homme debout, tournant la tête vers la gauche, main droite tendue._)

This very exciting drawing combines the subtlety and grace of the
_contrapposto_ pose with an extended, foreshortened, and accurately
viewed right arm. It exemplifies several qualities of a good drawing,
combining an interesting pose, a legible mood, clear anatomy, and a
simplified line.

Plate III, 35. Half prone man, holding himself up on his hands. (_Homme presque allongé se soutenant de ses bras._)

The pose echoes that of the famous Dying Gaul (ca. 190 B.C) in the
Capitoline Museum in Rome. Each arm bears weight in a different manner.
The foreshortened legs must be copied exactly. Throughout, the
information—external and internal—is very subtle. The boy was probably
first inscribed within a triangle of construction lines, with a plumb
line through one side of the head and left hand. Try to imagine such
geometrical shapes around your figures as you were trained to do in the
cast drawings (see comments to plate I, 5).

Plate III, 36. Standing man in profile, hiding his face in his hands. (_Homme debout de profil, se cachant le visage dans les mains._)

The pose is for Adam being expulsed from Paradise; it is a rhetorical
pose, with codified gestures. It could be used for anyone in despair or
grief. Throughout this section Bargue helps the student develop a
repertoire of archetypal poses. Learn to distinguish their individual
qualities; consider how figures can communicate meaning and emotion.

Plate III, 37. Standing man, left hand on his chest, right hand extended. (_Homme debout, main gauche sur la poitrine, main droite en arriére._)

The man strides forward, looking up as if imploring someone and putting
his hand on his chest to demonstrate his sincerity. Note the grace of
the extended arm and the carefully posed fingers. This pose is
traditional and, although rhetorical, it is full of emotion. The fact
that a pose is traditional does not mean it is worn out and useless; a
good artist can infuse standard iconography with fresh expression by
rethinking and experiencing the emotion, resulting in a figure that is
legible and communicative.

Plate III, 38. An archer. (_Homme tirant a l’arc._)

This drawing emphasizes the archer’s balance and the muscular tension
throughout his body—especially in his arms and upper body—as he pull the
bowstring back.

Plate III, 39. Seated man, hiding his face in his hands. (_Homme assis, se cachant le visage dans les mains._)

The student must learn to draw the figure in a variety of poses—seated,
lying down, leaning— with each position presenting specific problems.
This pose is complex, containing more detailed observation than
hitherto. Be careful to preserve the relationship of height and width so
that the negative spaces retain their descriptive quality. Also pay
attention to the breaks and overlappings in the contour,

Plate III, 40. Standing man, right hand on his chin, left hand behind his back. (_Homme debout, main droite sur le menton, main gauche dans le dos._)

Since antiquity the gesture of the hand to the chin has traditionally
symbolized pensive contemplation. Among the problems that should be
noted, the arms are both rather cumbersome in their foreshortening.
Although the right arm is well drawn, the left elbow seems out of place.
The upper torso looks small relative to the hip, legs, and head. Assume
this pose and check the appearance of your arms in a mirror, or ask a
friend to assume the pose for you. The rhythms of the legs are well
conceived and the disposition of weight seems logical.

Plate III, 41. Standing young man, left hand resting on a stand, right hand akimbo. (_Jeune homme debout, main gauche posée sur un mur, main droite sur les reins._)

This is an assertive pose. The young boy stands alongside the box, with
one hand resting on it. Between the weight of the hand on the box and
the weight on his standing leg, an equilibrium is established which
resounds throughout the body. The concavity of his right side emphasizes
the jut of the pelvis and then quickly tums into the convexity of the
buttock. A good plumb fine would run down the center of his body, from
the pit of his neck through his navel. Note how many straight notations
have been turned into curves,

Plate III, 42. Standing young man, hands crossed over his waist. (_Jeune homme debout, mains croisées sur le ventre._)

Here is another bound prisoner, this time with his arms in front. This
could also be Christ either presented to the populace in the traditional
_Ecce homo_ iconography, or being baptized by John the Baptist. The
drawing is a good example of anatomical articulation, particularly in
the legs around the knees and calves.

Plate III, 43. Man leaning against a stand, face lifted up. (_Homme appuyé le long d’un mur, visage vers le haut._)

This is a very relaxed pose seen from a low position. The legs are
strong, the fingers nicely posed and spaced, and there are great
subtleties of observation in the outline of his left side, from shoulder
to groin. Note the depiction of his weight-bearing right hand.

Plate III, 44. Supine young man. (_Jeune homme allongé._)

A supine young man with foreshortening effects across his whole body.
This is a pose often used for the dead Christ, the dead Abel, and
various martyrs. Use vertical reference lines to divide the body into
manageable portions; for example, from the ends of the fingers of the
right hand up through the thighs. Continue relating one part of the body
to the other.

Plate III, 45. Standing man, his hands behind his head, looking up. (_Homme debout, mains derrière la tête, visage en haut._)

This is a wonderful drawing of a man stretching. The relatively low
placement of the ears assists the foreshortening of the head. Muscular
rhythms play throughout the body. Very light interior lines show
features of the anatomy, such as the under part of the chin. On both
sides you can see the insertion of the _latissimus dorsi_ into the
armpit. The left leg is seen from the medial angle, that is, from the
inside, and should be much wider than the right leg, seen from the
front, which it is not.

Plate III, 46. Man pulling on a rope. (_Homme tirant une corde._)

This drawing depicts a man—with a rather small head for his body—pulling
on a rope. The gesture suggests that he is pulling against someone. The
right pelvis has dropped and the left buttock is compressed as a result
of the physical effort. The tapering of the right bicep into the forearm
is precisely noted. In drawing an action, pay attention to the muscles
that are working. They contract and change their forms: muscles are
shorter and fuller in flexion and leaner and longer in extension.

Plate III, 47. Standing man, arms spread out. (_Homme debout, bras écartés._)

This pose could represent surprise or astonishment. This is a very
developed drawing even without a face. Notice the guiding schematic
lines of the hands: Bargue groups the fingers together rather than
drawing them individually. This example provides an extremely good
drawing lesson: you see indications of the sternum, the knees, and the
ankles. Bargue does not want you to forget where the bones are. He has
caught the movement of the figure in all the limbs. Note the
foreshortening of the right forearm and of the left upper arm. Academies
in the nineteenth century usually had ropes hanging from the ceiling to
help the models maintain such poses.

Plate III, 48. Standing young man, three-quarter rear view, crossed arms. (_Jeune homme debout, trois quarts de dos, bras croisés._)

This drawing shows a bystander in pensive mood. The young man has fine
legs, broad buttocks, and faintly defined shoulder muscles. From this
point on the facial features are included, and the internal anatomical
features are better described than in previous examples.

Plate III, 49. Man lying on his right side. (_Homme allongé sur le côté droit._)

The bearded model sleeps, lying on his side. The shape of his body is
altered by gravity, not by effort. Noteworthy is the sag of the abdomen,
an area that is carefully developed by Bargue.

Plate III, 50. Seated man, left profile, slightly leaning toward the right. (_Homme assis, profil gauche, légèrement penché sur la droite._)

This pose is that of a bather seated on a rock and looking out to sea or
of a faun perched to watch mortals (or nymphs) at play or work. Keep in
mind that he is leaning away from you: his head is behind his shoulder;
the shoulder is behind the thigh.

Plate III, 51. Semi-prone man, holding himself up by his hands, the left leg turned back, head in profile. (_Homme allongé se tenant sur les avant-bras, la jambe gauche repliée, la tête de profil._)

This older man is posed like the young man in plate III, 35. The problem
here is drawing an older body with some sagging forms. There is a strong
sense of loose skin over the frame and musculature, which characterizes
the age of the man. The anatomy is more developed; the hands are
refined, as is the head. Even so, the anatomical observations do not
distract from the general unity. A pedantic convention is used for the
first time: the lower lines of the limbs and body are emphasized by
thickening. This mannerism is more exaggerated in the next drawing.
Whether this was done by Bargue or a revising editor is not known.

Plate III, 52. Supine man, a pillow under his back. (_Homme allongé, coussin sous le dos._)

A mature man is shown in a supine position in this very finished
drawing. Almost all of the outline has been made firm and
definite—perhaps by another hand. Supine and prone figures are hard to
plot. To determine the plumb line, find a center point at the groin,
equidistant from head and feet. Several additional verticals will help
relate smaller features.


_Académies_ by Another Hand

For some reason—perhaps the confusion of the war of 1870—Bargue did not
finish all sixty plates of part III. Evidently the original intention
was to conclude with a set of finished drawings, that is, drawings with
firm outlines, internal notations, without organizational lines, and
even with some chiaroscuro. One would love to have such a set in
Bargue’s hand. Unfortunately someone else—competent but without the
style or grace of Bargue’s hand the last eight plates, which are
reproduced here, in smaller format, not as models to copy but for the
historical record.

Plate III, 53. Standing man, rear view, arms crossed on chest. (_Homme de dos, deboutbras devant._)

Plate III, 54. Standing man, pushing something. (_Homme debout poussant quelque chose._)

Plate III, 55. Standing young man, right hand resting on a stand. (_Jeune garçon debout, main droite posée sur une table._)

Plate III, 56. Man seated on the ground, his hands holding his chest up, left leg folded back, head in three-quarter profile. (_Homme assis sur le sol les deux mains soutenant son buste, la jambe gauche repliée, la tête de trois quarts à droite._)

Plate III, 57. Standing man, right hand on left shoulder. (_Homme debout, main droite sur épaule gauche._)

Plate III, 58. Standing man, his two hands joined behind his head, without a loincloth. (_Homme debout, les deux mains jointes sur la tête, sans cache-sexe._)

Plate III, 59. Standing man, three-quarter view, right hand on his heart, with a loincloth. (_Homme debouttrois quarts face, main droite sur le cœur; avec cache-sexe._)

Plate III, 60. Standing man leaning against a stand, wearing a loincloth. (_Homme debout accoudé, avec cache-sexe._)



APPENDIX 2: THE SIGHT-SIZE TECHNIQUE


An Experienced Artist and Teacher Defines the Sight-Size Technique

In the course of a letter exchange about the sight-size technique, Peter
Bougie, who has been teaching the procedure to his students in his
Minneapolis, Minnesota, atelier for years, sent me this fine explanation
of the technique:

  The sight-size method of measurement was a common method of working
  for both students and accomplished artists prior to the twentieth
  century, during which it fell into disuse in most art education
  settings. The term “sight-size” refers to making a drawing the size it
  would be if projected onto a plane extending left or right from your
  drawing board and intersecting your line of sight. This enables the
  artist to look at the subject and the drawing from a chosen vantage
  point and see them side by side and appearing to be the same size. A
  plumb line [see glossary] is established for measuring widths on the
  subject from an established point, and a hand-held plumb line is used
  to line up features of the subject with the corresponding features of
  the drawing. This enables the artist to make very objective, virtually
  absolute, comparisons of shape and proportion. It is a superlative
  learning tool because it helps the student see objectively how what he
  or she has done compares to nature; that is, is the knee too high or
  too low? Has the width measurement to the end of the nose been placed
  too far from the vertical plumb line or too near to it? If you want
  the answer to either question, pick up the plumb line and see for
  yourself. The technique is an excellent tool because it establishes a
  common vantage point, an objective point of view, between student and
  teacher. There is no place for arguments about relative point of view,
  for the teacher and the student look at the subject from the same
  point of view, and the teacher is able to point out errors and
  incorrect observations objectively, and so help the student to see and
  understand what is really there, instead of offering vague
  generalities about whether or not something feels right or wrong.
  Finally, it is an excellent working method for any artist who wishes
  to use it in working directly from life in a controlled setting,
  because once you have mastered it you are able to fix solid reference
  points on a drawing or painting quickly, and save yourself a lot of
  misapplied effort. . . . Sight-size is a well known and proven method
  for taking measurements in a setting where the model is posed, or the
  subject is stationary. It’s a tool. It is no more theoretical than a
  pencil or a paintbrush. It’s useful when it’s used in the right way.
  Above all, the sight-size method is used to help students develop and
  improve their “eye” and, as they advance, their problem-solving
  skills.


Sight-Size to Copy the Bargue Plates

The use of sight-size technique is recommended in all three parts of the
course, It is basically a method of drawing in which the image produced
has the same dimensions on paper as the apparent dimensions of the
subject. There are several advantages to this technique when it is
followed correctly. It produces an accurate transcription of the subject
in the same size in which it is perceived. This permits continuous
comparison of the drawing with the model. Once students have become
proficient in the use of sight-size, they can easily correct their own
work. The practice of the sight-size technique also increases a
student’s ability to estimate accurately the apparent measurements of
the subject and transfer them correctly to paper. This talent soon
becomes instinctive; it is the greatest gift of practicing sight-size.
Both abilities—being able to correct oneself and being able to estimate
measurements—give the beginning student a sense of confidence. For
beginners, the advantages of the sight-size technique are so great that
it is recommended here, especially for students working alone. Although
intended for drawing from nature, that is, from three-dimensional
objects, it is easily adapted to the copying of drawings. Using
sight-size technique would standardize the approach to all three tasks
presented in the course (viz. working from casts, copying drawings, and
drawing _académies_) and, in general, would be a proper preparation for
the first drawing from live models using the technique.


How Old is the Technique?

There is endless debate among the practitioners about how old the
technique is and about who practiced it. Some adherents have attempted
to resurrect an ennobling lineage of artists who used the method, much
like Renaissance dukes and popes extending their family trees back to
Hercules. As a methodical studio practice it seems to be a late
nineteenth-century development. Although there are many instances where
one unself-consciously uses it not as a method but as a natural
approach—say, in portraiture or capturing figures at a distance—it is
best as an atelier practice. The examination of many etchings, drawings,
paintings, and photographs of early ateliers in session—some as far back
as the Renaissance—depict none of the upright easels necessary for the
practice of sight-size. In many other depictions of older ateliers, one
constantly sees younger students seated on the ground, with their
drawing boards in their laps.

[Fig. 44] 


Necessary Conditions for Sight-Size Practice

_First_, the object drawn and the paper upon which the object’s
appearance is transcribed must remain stable. Also, the drawing board on
the easel must be precisely upright and the easel stable—in the same
position on the floor—for the entire time the drawing takes to complete,
which may be several weeks. The light upon the object should always be a
stable, directional, light or, if coming from a window, always from the
same northern exposure. This means that the space or room must maintain
the same setup until the drawing is finished.

_Second_, the observing position of the artist as he or she studies the
object and the drawing must always be the same. The observing position
is usually at a comfortable distance from the setup and the easel, say,
three times the largest dimension of the drawing (to reduce the angle of
distortion) and at a spot where the drawing paper and the subject are
visually side by side.

Mark the position of your feet on the floor with tape, indicating the
position of each foot. The feet are best planted at shoulder-width
distance from each other; this increases your steadiness. Plant your
feet in position, lock your knees, and stand up straight each time you
step back to observe the subject or the drawing. Wear the same shoes
throughout the drawing process. Even the slightest change of view—such
as higher or lower heels—can affect your view and your judgment.

_Note_: Never draw the object while looking directly at it; always study
it from the same place and distance, and draw from memory, aided by your
measured marks.


Excursus: Shadow Boxes

A shadow box is usually used for cast drawings. You will be copying from
drawings already made from a cast. Even so, it is good to know how these
cast drawings were made since this will help you when you switch from
the Bargue cast drawings to actual casts.

The shadow box used for the cast setup is a small, three-sided box with
a bottom but no top, and two adjacent vertical sides. It can be built
from scratch or reconstructed from a wooden box (see fig. 44). The box,
of course, rests on a solid stand or table that elevates it to easel
height, so that when you stand in position you are looking at the center
of the object. Line the box with black paper or cloth to absorb light
and thereby lessen reflected shadows on the cast. (Some users prefer a
middle-gray toned paper or cloth to lessen the depth of the shadows.)
Light from a northern window or a lamp should create the best effect for
the draftsman: clarity of form, outline, and a sense of drama are to be
sought after. While working on the plates in part I, you will find
examples of various ways to manage lights.

To repeat, all these arrangements must remain absolutely stable
throughout the drawing process. Slight changes in the position of the
light or the cast can make it impossible to continue a drawing already
in progress. Trace the outline of the base of the cast on the bottom of
the shadow box just in case the cast gets moved.

Using sticks fastened to the sides of the box, hang a plumb line in
front of the cast. Position it so that it cuts through the cast
somewhere in the middle and crosses through some important reference or
angle points. This real plumb line will be the same as the plumb line
(vertical reference line) around which your drawing will be organized.
It may take some time to set the cast up in the shadow box.

In drawing from a cast, that is, making a life-size transcription of the
cast, the drawing paper on its easel will be placed alongside and just
slightly ahead of the subject in the shadow box. If the subject is a
cast or a still life, it should be in a setup, either on a stand or in a
shadow box. When drawing a live model, the model should be positioned
behind the easel, at some distance from which both could easily be seen,
so that the apparent height of the model would fit upon the sheet of the
drawing paper.

[Fig. 45] 


Drawing After a Cast: Positioning the Drawing

After the cast has been set up in the shadow box, the light adjusted,
and the easel placed with the drawing board and paper on it set properly
next to the shadow box, the drawing process can start. The placement of
the paper at the edge of the drawing board (on the model’s side) and the
drawing board at the easel edge (close to the view of the model) will
make it easier to make measurements from the subject and to make visual
comparisons of your work and the cast (fig. 45).

_Step 1_: Draw two horizontals across the paper that define the height
of the cast. Since you need a plumb line while drawing the figure, the
string of the plumb line is the handiest tool for this step. Use your
thumbnails to mark the visible distance on the taut string.
Stretch the string between two hands horizontally across the peak of the
head of the model and over the drawing paper. Memorize the path of the
line of the string across the paper; step forward and mark the path—one
or two marks will suffice.
Step back and use the string of your plumb line to check the mark for
accuracy; then lower the string;and repeat the process for the lowest
point of the feet; do not lower your head for this measurement, just
your eyes.
Stand back again and check the marks by holding up the string across the
drawing and the cast again. Draw a horizontal through each of the marks,
top and bottom.

_Step 2_: Decide on the placement of the cast’s image upon the paper by
estimating its width using the taught string or your eye.
Measure the width of the cast at its widest point from your set standing
position. Move the extended string over to the paper; decide where it
fits most comfortably, but not too far from the edge of the paper
nearest the cast. Mark both ends on the paper. Check your measurements.

_Step 3_: Draw a plumb line (a vertical reference line) from the top
line to the bottom line. It should be drawn well enough inside the width
limits you have previously set up.
Use the string of the plumb line again to check the width of the figure
and its placement on the paper before you draw the plumb line on the
paper. You must first pick out the plumb line you want on the subject, a
line, say, following the center of balance, preferably one that passes
through many or several useful points on the cast. This can be found and
preserved by dropping another plumb line in front of the cast from a
stick fastened to the shadow box. Judge where to hang the line from your
foot position.

Return to the location of the broadest width that you used earlier when
deciding where to place your drawing on the paper. Find by measurement
where the actual plumb line on the cast is within that measured width
and find the same spot on your drawing by measuring again with your
string. Draw the perpendicular through that spot, making sure that it is
square with the top and bottom horizontal lines.

As you continue, you must always look at the figure or subject from the
same vantage point and with the same stance—feet in position, legs and
arms locked and steady, as you hold out the measuring string or needle.
With your head always in the same position, look with one eye—always the
same eye. You want the middle of the drawing to be straight in front of
you. When you look down at the model’s feet, for instance, don’t drop
your head, just your eye. These small practices will soon become
habitual and will save you much aggravation.


Drawing After a Cast: Measuring Apparent Distances

Before beginning, measure the model from the plumb line to the widest
and lowest points. (1) Look for an important angle, concave or convex,
on the contour of the model. (2) From your marked floor position, hold
up your plumb line string and make sure that you are holding it
horizontally by comparing it with the top and bottom horizontals on the
drawing paper. (3) Pick an important point that will help define the
shape of the image. Start with the extremities and extended limbs. Move
the string—still held horizontally—over the point you wish to record.
(4) Make a mark on the plumb line where the horizontal string passes
through it and the angle on the cast. Take the length of string (held
tightly between the two fingers of your extended hands) and measure the
distance from the angle on the cast between your thumbnails and the
plumb line hanging before the cast. (5) Keeping your arms extended and
the string taut, move the string over the drawing paper; one end of the
string should be over the mark on the drawn plumb line, while the other
will be over the paper where the contour mark should be. Memorize that
spot. Step forward and mark it lightly. Step back and check the accuracy
of its placement with the extended plumb line.

Work this way around the figure until you have the shape circumscribed
by dots; when you are certain they are all correctly measured and
placed, you may connect the dots with straight lines. You can make lines
through the plumb line for the slant of the shoulders, hips, or other
features. Adding another horizontal or perpendicular vertical may help
you deal with some difficult areas. The measuring, placing, and
correcting of dots is cumbersome at first, but as you learn the method
you will be able to pick out fewer and better points on the contours to
work from and to estimate distances more quickly—sometimes with your eye
alone. Since there is a lot of stepping back to measure and forward to
mark or erase a spot, you should have in your hand at all times the
pencil or charcoal, the plumb line, and the eraser so that you can
switch instruments without losing your concentration.

Be sure to make these first connection lines straight. The curves can be
worked out later. The greater the amplitude of the curve, the more
straight lines—connected by points—you will need to outline the curve.
One fundamental of Bargue’s method is the simplification of complex
curves into straights; if one starts drawing a curve, one tends to draw
an arc, and it is hard to know where to stop. (As your eye gets
experienced, you will be able to connect some of the dots by curves.)

Once a full contour is drawn, it should be carefully checked—through
measurement and study all the way around—before features on the inside
of the form are put in. Studying your drawing or comparing it with the
model in a mirror will help you uncover errors. (A mirror should always
be kept handy for checking your drawing.) Refine the outline several
times before filling in the curves, putting lines in for the major
shadow; then revise the outline again. Once you fill in the major shadow
shape, you will see that the contour needs further adjustment.

Keep your dimensions accurate and tight: if the figure spreads just a
bit, you will have difficulty fitting the features into the outline and
you may even lose the sense of an organic whole. Where it is hard to
measure visually, you can resort to a tool for measurements again.
Remember that a slightly wider, inaccurate neck may change a young boy
into a mature man.


Drawing After Flat Models: Bargue’s Plates

The Bargue plates in parts I and II were drawn from the fixed point of
view of a stable model; they might have been drawn with sight-size
technique or a version of it. One of the main benefits of working in
sight-size—besides the production of an accurate image—is the training
it gives the eye in measuring visual dimensions. Both to prepare
yourself to work from casts and models in sight-size and to benefit from
this training of the eye, it is wise to adapt as much of the sight-size
technique as possible to the copying of the plates.

Place the plate and the drawing paper side by side on a drawing board,
an upright easel, or preferably on a well-lit wall. Locate a good plumb
line on the drawing. (You can tape a piece of string in position over
the image for the plumb line and for the top and bottom horizontals.)
Transfer them to the drawing. Set up comfortable foot positions centered
on a line perpendicular to the juncture of the plate and the paper.
Using the foot positions will get you used to judging measurements from
a distance with a plumb line, memorizing them, stepping forward to
record them, and stepping back to correct them. Try to do as much of
your work as possible in this manner. At times copying details close up
will be necessary, but always step back to judge your work. Stepping
back also keeps you conscious of the effect of the whole, which you can
further ascertain using a mirror. Check your shadow masses in a black
mirror.

[Fig. 46] 


Pros and Cons Concerning the Sight-Size Technique: A Dialogue

Using sight-size as the only way of drawing might make practitioners
model-bound and interfere with their depiction of objects from memory.
Since models are incapable of holding dynamic poses for more than a few
minutes, it may delay learning the elements that give motion to a
drawing. In addition to increasing the student’s dependence upon the
model, it also creates a dependence upon ideal conditions—typically
those encountered in a studio— such as a controlled light source, an
uncluttered and neutral background, and a model trained to hold long
poses on a raised platform. However, it does not hinder the depiction of
subjects larger or smaller than life-size because there are several easy
mechanical means of enlarging or diminishing drawn images. Peter Bougie,
the artist responsible for the fine definition of the sight-size
technique at the beginning of this appendix, discussed the merits and
disadvantages of the practice with me in an exchange of letters in 2001,
from which several excerpts follow. In response to my comment about the
innumerable times one wanted to draw something when a sight-size setup
(particularly an upright easel) was not feasible, he replied:

“On the slant of the easel, I’ll only put in this two cents’ worth: a
vertical easel is necessary for two reasons. One is so you can step back
and look at the subject and draw (with both the subject and drawing in
view) side by side without moving your head up and down or left and
right. Two, since you’re working from a fixed vantage point and
measuring, your drawing becomes distorted the more your easel tips away
from the vertical, because the top of the drawing is closer to the
subject than the bottom.

"Sight-size is very useful in many ways but has definite limitations.
It’s a good teaching tool and we insist that everyone use it because it
sharpens the beginner’s eye for proportion relatively quickly and
provides an objective context in which to work. It’s good for use in the
studio in a controlled setting, but it’s impractical for landscape
painting (not theoretically, but in practical terms) or making studies
from life on the fly. I’ve also noticed that for some students who are
naive (in their drawing experience), or of a strong logical mindset,
sight-size gets in the way of seeing when they reach a certain point in
their development. They will use the plumb line too much and their eye
not enough. I’ve always thought that sight-size gets you close to where
you want to go, in terms of seeing nature correctly, but if you don’t
step back and compare what you’ve done to what you see, it can trip you
up. In an _académie_ study, if you have a head that’s 1/32 or 2/32 too
big and a width across the shoulders that is about that much too narrow,
the head will look quite large, and you can stand there with your plumb
line for an hour and be unable to measure those small fractions with any
confidence. You’ll just think the head looks big and you won’t know why
unless you interrelate the parts. So you have to look and compare;
that’s what it comes down to. And any artist worth his salt ought to
regularly practice sitting down with a pad on his lap, or some flat
surface, to develop a capacity for gathering information that way, if
for no other reason than that situations often call for it.

“I hope I haven’t been too didactic. Finally, it’s whatever works. But,
in my opinion, that ‘whatever’ has to be grounded in some solid method,
or it sounds a lot like the kind of vague instruction people pay for in
so many of the art programs out there these days.”
“You cut the Gordian knot for me,” I replied. “The knot was in my head.”
Then I continued:
“Sight-size is great for teaching observation and precision. It is also
wonderful in teaching because the correction can be precise. I find a
problem in sight-size: if carried on too long, the students become
model-bound and limited to the poses they can set before them. This
keeps them from attempting motion, some expressions, interactions
between personages, etc. They just draw and paint models sitting, lying,
or standing around. (Gérôme complained that he often couldn’t get the
good charcoal renderers out of the life class and into painting.) But,
still, if you want to be an exacting realist, sight-size shows you the
way.
“The Florence Academy of Art (under Daniel Graves) has evening free
drawing sessions where the students draw after models with their drawing
boards on their laps, a slanted or a straight easel, whatever. These
freewheeling sessions occur two or three nights a week, with poses of
fifteen minutes to an hour. You stand or sit where you can. I did not
realize that this exercise was a natural corrective to the habits of the
sight-size technique that were picked up in the daytime sessions at the
school.
“The Bargue course, with its mixture of casts and _académies_, is set up
like the private ateliers of the French academy. In Paris the students
drew alternately from casts of antiquities and from models, three weeks
for each in tum. In Florence students draw from the cast for half a day
and from models for the other half. Consequently one could personally
move toward realism or idealism in one’s personal style. Usually one
stopped somewhere in between. Being a purist in either direction could
put your style in a straight jacket. Bargue gives you both casts of
perfect bodies and parts in the first section and a variety of body
types—including the non-ideal, aged body—in the third part.
“I am not against other methods nor a partisan of any (although I do
naturally prefer and understand best what I was taught, but must protect
myself from being dogmatic about it); I think that different methods of
drawing from life should just be called methods, none the ‘one way,’ and
that the principles should be recognized as part of the method that
organizes work and observation, not as absolutes. The payoff will always
be the results.”

To which Mr. Bougie replied: “You’re right about the shortcomings of
sight-size—it’s strictly for working in controlled situations, and it
does breed a dependence on the model. I’m going to try having students
do more work from flat copy of expressive figures, figures in motion,
and so on, to try to bridge the gap between the study of nature and its
application to making pictures. In doing that, I’m going to compare the
two and try to show people how they differ. The trick will be to keep
them on track with both the observation and the learning about
convention without having the limitations of each method pollute the
other, that is, become shortcuts, excuses, or mannerisms in the hands of
the inexperienced.”



APPENDIX A: _MÉTHODE_


_Source: The Bargue Method, Learning to Draw the Traditional Way by
Fernando Freitas_

[]

Let’s walk through the process of copying one Bargue plate. The
early-stage Bargue plates provide an image of the construct, composed of
large, simple shapes. (See Illustration 5a.) Using a fine knitting
needle, try to form this simple construct using a minimum number of
directional lines. The visual result should be a drawing made of simple
geometric shapes. (See Illustration 5b.) The reason for starting this
way is simple: By focusing on the construct, you won’t get seduced by
the distracting smaller shapes and details. Rather, you train your eye
to master distance, proportion, and angles and to identify relationships
and key points.
Once the construct is complete, you can move on to articulation,
detailing the form’s contour (its outer edges) and the all-important
lines where the light meets the shadow (sometimes called the bedbug
line, shadow edge, or terminator line). Break down each simple shape
from the construct into a descriptive complex shape that rehearses the
topography of the forms. (See Illustration 6.) The subjects will become
more complex as you work your way through the program.
After refining the contour, the next step is to separate the lights from
the shadows to achieve a simple, flat, clearly delineated silhouette, as
seen in Illustration 7. At this stage, you are visually stating what is
receiving direct light and what is in shadow, and the result bears a
true likeness of the subject.

[Illustration 5a: The simple geometric shapes that make up the
construct.]

[Illustration 5b: The construct (location, size, and structure).]

[Illustration 6: Articulation—detailing the contour and the edge of the
core shadow.]

[Illustration 7: The silhouette, showing the division between light and
dark.]

Throughout the process, try to view the image and its component parts as
abstract shapes; this helps to simplify the form in the mind’s eye.
There are five basic geometric forms that comprise the drawing lexicon:
sphere, cube, cylinder, pyramid, and cone. Try to see and draw various
forms as versions of these five shapes—a leg can be treated as a column,
the head as a sphere, or a nose as a pyramid. You can also view light
and dark shapes as silhouettes of creatures, cartoon characters, or
other shapes, similar to finding images in the clouds. (See Illustration
8.) By focusing on these shapes—and not being preoccupied with the
complex, three-dimensional form that the shape is part of—you will find
it easier to accurately lay in forms.

[Illustration 8: The essential shadow shapes of the image can be seen as
abstract shapes or as creatures or animals.]

Once you have established those big shapes separating light and shadow,
it’s time to begin rendering values. We refer to a 9-value scale, on
which 1 represents pure light, 9 represents pure dark, and 5 is the
exact middle value. (See Illustration 9a.) This scale is the “alphabet”
of the eye. As your eye becomes trained, you will become increasingly
proficient at identifying the values you see and depicting them in your
drawings, giving you more detailed and lifelike renderings, such as the
drawing in Illustration 9b.

[Illustration 9a] [Illustration 9b]
[Illustrations 9a, 9b above.]

Moving back to our Bargue drawing, you next render the shadows, again
working from large to small and from simple to complex. (See
Illustration 10.) In this stage, you will gradually learn the rules of
light, including the principles of the shadow edge, reflected light,
cast shadows, and the various levels of values in the shadows.

[Illustration 10: Rendering the shadows—assessing values in the shadows
and showing what areas are light darks, middle darks, and darkest
darks.]

[Illustration 11: Rendering the lights—starting by rendering the larger
forms.]

After rendering the shadows, render the lights. (See Illustration 11.)
By practicing this, you will learn to distinguish between direct and
reflected light (shown in Illustration 12), the different levels of
values in the light, and facets or planes of the form. Rendering also
teaches the key skill of transitioning between values through hard,
soft, blended, and lost edges. (See Illustration 13.)

[Illustration 12] [Illustration 13]
[Illustrations 12, 13 above.]

In copying four successive Bargue plates, artists master increasingly
advanced skills. In the first stage, the focus is on developing a strong
silhouette. For the second drawing, students build on this ability by
copying an image with smaller shadow shapes and more forms and value
ranges. In the third Bargue drawing, students work on a softly lit image
to execute a more detailed subject (see Illustration 14), and beginning
at this point students must develop the construct on their own. In the
fourth and final drawing, the lighting and forms are extremely complex,
and students are required to do a comparative measurement exercise to
better understand ratios—a crucial skill for figure and portrait work.

[Illustration 14a] [Illustration 14b]
[Illustrations 14a, 14b above.]

These drawings are more than just exercises; they form a system that
prepares students to excel in painting and other artistic pursuits, all
of which require the ability to build constructs, identify shapes,
understand tonal value ranges, master complex lighting, and render
forms. In addition, despite the fact that during the Bargue course one
is working in monochrome, the lessons learned through this process can
help you develop an eye for seeing the properties of color.
The practicalities of the Bargue approach have a strong bearing on a
range of modern disciplines, from animation and visual effects to gaming
and tattoo artistry. A number of students have come to ARA to bring
their skills up to the level needed to succeed in their chosen fields.
For example, Kalene Dunsmoor earned a job with Industrial Light & Magic
on the strength of her fine art portfolio. She has since pursued a
successful career with various visual-effects studios. According to
Dunsmoor, the industry values academic drawing skills as much as
computer proficiency. “Those skills don’t come along often,” she says.
“But they are in high demand, because you need to know all the same
things: edges, color, light and dark, and the drive to finish things
perfectly.”

It is unfortunate that in today’s world, proper drawing habits have
given way to expediency. But we firmly believe that those habits should
be taken as seriously as any other discipline. The Bargue drawing
process may seem at first to be a simple copying exercise, but the
skills it teaches can take you far as you pursue your creative goals.
